---
layout: post
title:  "10 Ways to Put More Useful and Focused Writing into Your Life"
date: 2019-08-22
categories: thinking
---
So here’s the idea: Write more often than you read! Make writing goals so that you can create more than you consume. A good start will be for you to create an idea list then do a free write based on that list. Create a theme for each or some of the free writes that you did. You can then add more writing as you progress. For example: I write about my CS progress and plans every day.

Here are 10 simple ways I personally do, which you can start with to make Writing part of your daily life.

1. **Add themes/topics to your idea lists and free writes.**
    This will focus the ideas contained within, and force you to actually think about the back end of your idea lists. Free writing randomly can be helpful in some contexts, but realize that you should consciously decide to write randomly instead of focusing your words in a particular direction.

2. **Write short stories.**
    While it may take time (2-3 hours), the resulting story may be worth it. Perhaps write one every weekend, which has at least 5 characters and a plot. As for me, I just want to try it, to see what effects it has on my worldview. I imagine that describing people with body language will be useful, and that I’ll see characteristics that I want. I could systematize character creation using a list of personal characteristics and giving characters flaws that I bring out in plot.

3. **Write about conversations that you have.**
    Write about the verbals and nonverbals, the way it made you feel, the topic, and how you can influence the energy and mood of the experience. This reflection may be key to speeding social learning.

4. **Write about a particular goal’s progress.**
    Say this summer I take SCIS s-111. I then write about my progress, frustrations, goals, etc. on a daily basis to stay focused and create emotional energy and time for consistent reflection.

5. **Write about the mundane experiences you have.**
    You may have days that are filled with lots of activities that you don’t often think about. Choose something that you’ve never really considered, like washing dishes or driving from place to place, and write about it!

6. **Make an Observation journal.**
    Make a concerted effort to get very good at observing the things and people around you. Write about ways to get better at observing things, details that you can remember, and read a few books on practicing observation and what to observe to get some best practices. Use this journal to create an observation habit.

7. **Write down your schedule.**
    Write your schedule in a way that emphasizes how it addresses goals you’ve set for yourself. Each event should have some motivation attached to it, to add emotive weight to your day. Instead of just times and events, make it into a kind of appendix.

8. **Write letters.**
    Write one letter to a friend every day, and send it to that friend. The format should be addressed to them, focusing on the things that are important between the both of you.

9. **Write poems.**
    Pick a format and write in that format every day for a week. Then choose a new format for the next week. Express the workings of your emotions as accurately as possible.

10. **Define your problems.**
    Sit down with the most present problem in your life once a week. Detail its origins, effects, how it operates, and set out to understand it. 
