layout: post
title: "What's gone wrong?"
date:   2021-07-14
categories: Thiel
---
This is the second of a series of posts outlining Peter Thiel's views on progress and stagnation.

## What’s wrong with our institutions?

### Overregulation
I’m libertarian, I think it’s because the government’s outlawed technology. We’re not allowed to develop new drugs with the FDA charging $1.3 billion per new drug. You’re not allowed to fly supersonic jets because they’re too noisy. You’re not allowed to build nuclear power plants - say nothing of fusion or thorium or any of these other new technologies that might really work. And so I think we basically outlawed everything to do with the world of stuff, and the only thing you’re allowed to do is in the world of bits. And that’s why we’ve had enormous progress in computers and finance. Those were the two areas there was enormous innovation in the last 40 years. It looks like finance is in the process of getting outlawed, so the only thing left at this point will be computers. \[[15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IzAW18s3Wg)]

I disagree with the premise that there’s some sort of tradeoff between finance and other areas of innovation. It’s easy to be anti-finance at this point in our society, and I think the reality is we have an economy that got very lopsided towards finance, but it’s fundamentally because people weren’t able to do other things. So if you ask “Why did all the rocket scientists go to work on Wall Street in the ‘90s to create new financial products?” and you say they were paid too much in finance and we need to beat up on the finance industry, that seems like that’s the wrong side to focus on. I think the answer was they couldn’t get jobs as rocket scientists any more because you couldn’t build rockets or supersonic airplanes or anything like that. It’s like, why did brilliant people in the Soviet Union become grandmaster chess players? It’s not that there’s anything deeply wrong with chess. It’s that they weren’t allowed to do anything else.

I always worry that we’re not as free a country as would be desirable and that there are, certainly with respect to innovation, there are many areas where it’s effectively been outlawed. Not in the area of computers, which are still quite unregulated on the whole. There has been a lot of progress. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

It’s a complicated history. We had the thalidomide disaster with the FDA so there are specific things that you can point to that went very wrong. I think today you would not get the polio vaccine approved. When it was first used, they dosed it wrong, and I think they gave – 10 or 15 people got polio accidentally. So today that would probably slow it down for another 20 years or something like that. I do wonder whether we become too risk-adverse in various ways.

If you’re Bill Gates starting Microsoft in 1975, you don’t have people from government checking your code, checking how safe it is, how dangerous it is. If you’re working in a biotech company, you have massive regulatory barriers all the way through. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I think if we had less regulation, a lot of these things could happen. It’s possible – it’s possible there will be some global – maybe the FDA will have less of a throttle on global innovation in biotechnology.

If you are starting a computer software company, that costs maybe $100,000, to get a new drug through the FDA, maybe on the order of a billion dollars or so. If the FDA were regulating video game technologies, and you had to do a double-blind study to make sure that the video games weren’t addictive, damaging to your brain, etc. These things are very overdetermined. It’s driven by many different factors. My narrow attempt to get out of it is not necessarily to come to DC and beg the regulators to be more reasonable. It is just to try to find ways for people to succeed at the margins. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

I think money and the nature of money is somehow much less important than all the microregulations that make up the economy. If you give me a choice of getting rid of the vast bulk of government regulations and keeping the Fed, I’d much rather do that than keeping all the other zoning laws and crazy rules we have and going with PayPal, Bitcoin, gold, any sort of alternate currency one could come up with.

### Dysfunctional governance
The entire modern political order is predicated on easy and relentless growth. The give-and-take of Western democracies depends on the idea that we can craft political solutions that enable most people to win most of the time. But in a world without growth, we can expect a loser for every winner. Many will suspect that the winners are involved in some sort of racket, so we can expect an increasingly nasty edge to our politics. We may be witnessing the beginnings of such a zero-sum system in politics in the U.S. and Western Europe, as the risks shift from winning less to losing more, and as our leaders desperately cast about for macroeconomic solutions to problems that have not been primarily about economics for a long time. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

Most of our political leaders are not engineers or scientists and do not listen to engineers or scientists. Today a letter from Einstein would get lost in the White House mail room, and the Manhattan Project would not even get started; it certainly could never be completed in three years. I am not aware of a single political leader in the U.S., either Democrat or Republican, who would cut health-care spending in order to free up money for biotechnology research — or, more generally, who would make serious cuts to the welfare state in order to free up serious money for major engineering projects. Robert Moses, the great builder of New York City in the 1950s and 1960s, or Oscar Niemeyer, the great architect of Brasilia, belong to a past when people still had concrete ideas about the future.

I am somewhat pessimistic about the possibility of government being a key, a place where the great stagnation gets reversed. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

Even something like the SDI program in the 1980s. The debate in the ’80s was, it’s a dangerous first-strike weapon versus a great defensive technology, whereas today, people would say that SDI was just this fictional thing that would have never worked. Again, this very odd way that our expectations have been dramatically reduced.

I think the first signal one that really went wrong was Nixon’s war on cancer. I always do think the 1970s were this decade where many of our institutions, especially our governmental institutions, started to work much less well. That was perhaps the signal one where things went badly wrong.

In terms of investing in science and technology, it seems to me that the minimum criterion for doing it is to have some understanding of these things and some ability to evaluate them properly. In a government in which two-thirds of the representatives are lawyers and in which . . . Again, just using the House and Senate as a proxy for our government, by generous count, no more than 35 have degrees in engineering or science or anything like that, or any technical field, very generously defined, both the House and Senate.

Perhaps these are not the right people to be driving these investments. I think we, again, should have much more of a focus on substance, much less on process. I always use the Solyndra bankruptcy as an example in this question of what went wrong. There’s a Republican process critique. The process was screwed up. There were kickbacks. Somehow, there was this corruption. They could never quite prove it, but that was the intuition. The Democratic defense was, “We had a process. We had a portfolio, a financial process where we gave money to lots of different things.” You let 100 flowers bloom or something like that.

A mathematical objection to it was that a cylinder has 2πr the surface area of a flat panel, which would be 2r and therefore is, by definition, 1 over π as efficient as a flat panel. You could just use ninth-grade, high school geometry to show that this was a demonstrably inferior technology. It was never going to be commercially viable. You have a Nobel laureate, Steve Chu, running the Energy Department who is not allowed to use ninth-grade high school geometry in evaluating what to do. That sort of a society, that sort of a government is one that should not be allowed to make any investments in these areas whatsoever.

I wonder whether on some level, the U.S. constitutional system can even work without some sort of growth. Because I think the way – the way things fundamentally work is you have people around the table in the Congress, the White House, and you pass bills that gives some more. A little bit for you, a little bit for me, a little bit for everybody. If you’re a difficult person who doesn’t get along with people, there’s nothing for you. And that sort of a political mechanism works quite well, so long as the pie is growing. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

If the pie is not growing, there’s much less need to cooperate, to craft new legislation. And is actually not clear to me how well our constitutional system even works. We’ve had in the Western world 200 years of growth, 250 years of growth, since the late 18th century. And if you look at the 1930s, which was probably the one-decade where there was a real shock to growth, it put enormous strain on all the constitutional democratic, republican types of systems. And I do think that’s an enormous challenge in our time. So I think we should not be complacent about this at all.

I suspect that the bureaucratic incentives [in governments] really cut against people making sustained effort for several years to build something that really works. There is an aspect – I think there is something quite toxic about the whole contractor subculture in DC where people have incentives to sort of bill by the hour, to have projects that take really long and are overly complex so that nobody really has responsibility.

I’m sort of more on the libertarian side politically. I’m generally skeptical of government ability to do things. But even I was shocked that something like the Obamacare website couldn’t work. This is not the Manhattan Project. And so there has been – I think there has been some decline in the government’s ability to do these things. And I suspect – I suspect it has a lot to do with very – with bureaucratic incentives that are extremely – extremely misaligned.

It’s a very open question of whether you could have the democratic process in a world without growth. You can’t craft compromise where everyone comes out ahead. \[[9](https://yaledailynews.com/blog/2013/04/16/billionaire-investor-predicts-bleak-future-for-innovation/)]

I think that it's very hard to see how anything like the kinds of societies we have in Western Europe, the United States, could function without growth. I think the way a parliamentary republican democracy works is you have a group of people sitting around the table, they craft complicated legislation, and there's a lot of horse trading, and as long as the pie's growing, you can give something to everybody. When the pie stops growing, it becomes a zero sum dynamic, and the legislative process does not work. So, the sort of democratic types of parliamentary systems we've had for the last 200, 250 years have mapped on to this period of rapid growth. We had a very bad experiment in the 1930s where the growth stopped, at least from the economic sense, and the systems became fascist or communist. It doesn't actually work. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

So, I suspect that if we're in for a period of long growth [Note: misspeak? Long period without growth?], I don't think our kind of government can work. I think there is a prospect of all sorts of forms of violence, more violence by the state against its citizens. There may be more zero sum wars globally, or there may be other ways things are super deformed to pacify people. So, maybe everyone just smokes marijuana all day, but that's also kind of deformed. But I think a world without growth is either going to be a much more violent or a much more deformed world. And again, it's not the case that growth simply solves all problems. So, you can have very rapid growth, and you can still have the problem of violence. You can still have bad things that can happen, but that's our only chance. Without growth, I think it's very hard to see how you have a good future.

[Eric Weinstein: Why do you think it is that almost nobody sees your preoccupation with violence reduction?] It's hard for me to come up with a good answer to these sort of sociological questions. I think people generally don't think of the problem of violence as quite as central as I think it is. I think it's a very deep problem on a human level. If you think of sort of this mimetic element to human nature where we copy one another, we want the things other people want, and there's a lot of room for conflict, and that if it's not channeled very carefully, a violent conflict in human relationships, in human societies, between human societies, and this is, I think, a very deep problem. It’s sort of Christian anthropology, but you also have the same in Machiavelli or... There are a lot of different traditions where human beings are, if not evil, they're at least dangerous. I think the sort of soft or anthropological biases that a lot of people have in late modernity or in the enlightenment world are that humans are by nature good, they're by nature peaceful, but that's not the norm. So, that might be a general bias people have, is that people can't be this violent. It's not this deep a problem. It's a problem other people have. There's some bad people who are violent, but it's not a general problem. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

It’s hard to remember this, but our government was once high tech, too. When I moved to Cleveland, defense research was laying the foundations for the internet. The Apollo program was just about to put a man on the moon–and it was Neil Armstrong, from right here in Ohio. The future felt limitless. \[[20](https://time.com/4417679/republican-convention-peter-thiel-transcript/)]

But today our government is broken. Our nuclear bases still use floppy disks. Our newest fighter jets can’t even fly in the rain. And it would be kind to say the government’s software works poorly, because much of the time it doesn’t even work at all. That is a staggering decline for the country that completed the Manhattan project. We don’t accept such incompetence in Silicon Valley, and we must not accept it from our government.

### Short-sighted venture capital
The general theme I would suggest is that all trends are overrated. So if you think about current trends in technology: you know, healthcare IT software, education software, overrated. SAS enterprise software, really overrated. Big data, cloud computing, if you hear those words, you need to think fraud, you need to run away as fast as you possibly can. And the reason these buzzwords tell you that something is—these buzzwords are sort of like a tell in poker that people are bluffing, and the business is not undifferentiated, because the buzzwords tell you that it is one company of a category that’s undifferentiated from the others in that category, and therefore are symptomatic somehow of a lot of competition, and a bad business idea. So you don’t want to be the fourth online pet food company, you don’t want to be the tenth thin film solar panel company, you don’t want to be the one-thousandth restaurant in San Francisco. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

So there is something about if you can describe what a company is doing very straight-forwardly by referencing these buzzwords, these categories that already exist, that’s actually a sign that it’s a pretty bad idea. And I think one of the challenges, conversely, that you have when you have a very successful business is to try to describe it. It doesn’t actually fit into any of the boxes precisely, and that makes it very hard for people to understand what’s going on. Sometimes you even have companies that are genuinely innovative that do something very new, and they get mischaracterized as being one in a category that’s doing something else. So for example, Google in the late 90s was categorized as just another search engine, and this was one of the reasons people thought it was not that valuable, when probably the correct characterization would have been it was the first computer powered search. All the others were this human-organized list. So it was qualitatively different. But it sort of got mischaracterized. Or Facebook, in 2004, would have been characterized, probably still is characterized, as a social networking company, most straight-forwardly. And of course, it was not the first. There had been a number of others that had done this before.

One of my friends, Reid Hoffman, who started LinkedIn, started the company called SocialNet in 1997. So they already had the name social networking in the company seven years before Facebook came along. They had all these crazy ideas. You were going to have these avatars in cyberspace, and some people would be cats, and some people would be dogs, and there’d be all these questions how they’d interact, and people weren’t really all that interested in that. And it turned out that it turned out that what actually mattered was not social networking among virtual cats and dogs, or anything of that sort. It was real identity. And Facebook was the first company to crack the problem of real identity. That’s not the way it got characterized because we’re always so biased trying to put things in a pattern in a category, and not to think about what’s unique, what’s original, what’s different.

### Dysfunctional science
[Science] has gone dramatically for the worse. The basic narrative I would give is that we had this preexisting ecosystem of idiosyncratic scientists who were driving research in all sorts of independent ways. You could dramatically accelerate it by giving them a lot of money, which is what we did in the 1930s to 1960s, but it came at this price of suddenly politicizing the system. The problem is that a good scientist is very much the opposite — now, this may be more like 180 degrees, not 175 degrees, it’s 179.5 degrees — the opposite of a good politician. It’s like, a scientist is someone who’s interested in the truth, a politician is someone who has a very troubled relationship with the truth. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

I think we’ve had this sort of Gresham’s law, where the bad scientists have driven out the good, or people who are nimble in the art of writing government grant applications have replaced the eccentric scientists who’ve really pushed the research. I think that’s this deep corruption of the process.

It’s very hard for the public to fully appreciate it, because science is so specialized. Who am I to evaluate superstring research, or quantum computing research, or nanotech, or immunotherapy as applied to cancer? Because of this extreme specialization of science, you have these self-reinforcing expert communities that have made this process of politicization extremely opaque to the broader public.

I’m very much in favor of science, but I’m skeptical of people who excessively invoke science as an incantation of sorts. When you use the word science it’s often a tell, like in poker, that you’re bluffing and that no science at all is going on. We have political science, we have social science. We don’t have physical science or chemical science. There are just physics and chemistry, there’s no debate. If you think about other areas where people use the word science excessively, I think those are areas that we should perhaps be a lot more skeptical of.

One of the other institutions that I think has scaled quite badly—I always think of science as tech's older brother who's fallen on hard times. And big science has scaled extremely badly. And this is sort of the groupthink of the universities, that they have this ethos that they give us a universal knowledge about the universe that everybody gets. It's something that scales to an extraordinary degree. And the lies that we tell around big science have been linked in with the university lies. And I think a lot of our problems can be described in this way. \[[21](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/events/2019-wriston-lecture-end-computer-age-thiel)]

### Difficulty of rewarding innovators: \[[3](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/peter-thiels-notes-on-startups/)]
One of the things that I think is true of any great company is you have to build something that is valuable to the world and you have to capture some fraction of what you create. So you have to create X dollars in value, and you have to get Y percent of X. X and Y are totally independent variables. In most cases, Y is about zero percent. This is a disturbing element in the history of innovation: A lot of innovators discovered things, but weren’t able to get anything. Tesla was out-competed by Edison, even though Edison had an inferior technology. The Wright brothers came up with the first airplane, but they didn’t get to be rich. Of course, in the sciences, it tends to be even worse. If you are Einstein, you come up with general relativity. You don’t get to be a billionaire; you don’t even get to be a millionaire.

It’s always this question of how do you actually capture some of the value of what you create. There is something very unusual about software businesses where so many of them have this monopoly-like character that enables people to capture a tremendous amount of value. That’s a very underexplored dimension of it. The marginal cost of producing software is zero. So you have these incredible economies of scale. That’s a classic monopoly, a natural monopoly business.

## What’s wrong with our culture?
Compared with other thinkers, Peter emphasises the importance of culture and attitudes in causing stagnation - and having the potential to get us out of it.

### People underestimate the importance of culture
From the Enlightenment on, modern political philosophy has been characterized by the abandonment of a set of questions that an earlier age had deemed central: What is a well-lived life? What does it mean to be human? What is the nature of the city and humanity? How does culture and religion fit into all of this? For the modern world, the death of God was followed by the disappearance of the question of human nature. \[[10](https://www.evernote.com/shard/s542/client/snv?noteGuid=46c636b6-b404-45df-ab0a-1f84c6fdc8c2&noteKey=7c94233539b8258d72b395a063f3c589&sn)]

This disappearance had many repercussions. If humans can be approximated as rational economic actors (and, ultimately, even Adam Smith and Karl Marx agree on this point), then those who seek glory in the name of God or country appear odd; but if such odd people are commonplace and capable of asserting themselves with explosive force, then the account of politics that pretends they do not exist needs to be reexamined.

There is, of course, an older Western tradition, a tradition that offered a less dogmatically economic view of human nature. The older account realized that not all people are so modest and lacking in ambition that they will content themselves, like Voltaire’s Candide, with cultivating their gardens. Instead it recognized that humans are potentially evil or at least dangerous beings; and while there are vast differences between the Christian virtues of Augustine and the pagan virtues of Machiavelli, neither thinker would have dared lose sight of the problematic nature of humanity. The most direct method for comprehending a world in which not all human beings are homo economicus would therefore appear to involve a return to some version of the older tradition.

The essential strangeness of the unfolding confrontation between the West and Islam consists of the radical difference between the way the confrontation itself is viewed by the two sides. Perhaps never before in history has there been such a radical difference. The Islamic side retains a strong religious and political conception of reality; it views its struggle with the West as a matter more important than life and death, because Allah will judge his followers in the afterlife by how they performed in that struggle. Bin Laden would quote with approval the speeches by Cromwell and Urban II, requiring almost no changes at all. The language still resonates and motivates heroic self-sacrifice.

By contrast, on the Western side (if it can even be called a side), there is great confusion over what the fighting is for, and why there should be a civilizational war at all. An outright declaration of war against Islam would be unthinkable; we much prefer to think of these measures as police actions against a few unusual criminal sociopaths who happen to blow up buildings. We are nervous about considering a larger meaning to the struggle, and even the staunchest Western partisans of war know that we no longer believe in the existence of a Gott mit uns in heaven.

And then one encounters Schmitt’s troubling challenge. A side in which everyone, like Hobbes, values this earthly life more than death is a side where everyone will run away from fighting and confrontation; but when one runs away from an enemy that continues to fight, one is ultimately going to lose - no matter how great the numerical or technological superiority may appear at the outset.

The modern West has lost faith in itself. In the Enlightenment and post-Enlightenment period, this loss of faith liberated enormous commercial and creative forces. At the same time, this loss has rendered the West vulnerable. Is there a way to fortify the modern West without destroying it altogether, a way of not throwing the baby out with the bathwater?

A direct path is prevented by America’s constitutional machinery. By “setting ambition against ambition” with an elaborate system of checks and balances, it prevents any single ambitious person from reconstructing the old Republic. America’s founders enjoyed a freedom of action far surpassing that of America’s subsequent politicians. Eventually, ambitious people would come to learn that there is little one can do in politics and that all merely political careers end in failure. The intellectual paralysis of self-knowledge has its counterpoint in the political paralysis embedded in our open system of government.

Let's say a little bit about [Girard’s] theory. It was this theory of human psychology as deeply mimetic where you copy other people. But you imitate people but that's how you learn to speak as a child. You copy your parents language, that's how, but then you also imitate desire and then there are all sorts of aspects of mimesis that can lead to mass violence mass insanity. So it has, it's both what enables human culture to function, but it also is quite, quite dangerous. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

When I came across this constellation of ideas as an undergraduate at Stanford, my biases were sort of libertarian, classic liberal, only individuals exist. Individuals are radically autonomous, can think for themselves. And so this was, it was a powerful corrective to that intellectually. But then it also worked on an existential level where you sort of realize, wow, there are all these ways that I've been hyper mimetic, I've been hyper tracked, why am I at Stanford, why does this matter so much? Why am I doing all the things I'm doing?

And that's, it's a prism through which when one looks at a lot of things that I found to be quite helpful over recent decades. I think the preference falsification you can think of in mimetic terms where everybody goes along with what everybody else thinks, and then you can get these chaotic points where all of a sudden things can shift much faster than you would think possible because there are all these dynamics that are not simply rational. It's not quite correct to model people as these sort of classical Adams, it's much more entangled.

There are a number of different books that Girard wrote. I think the magisterial one is probably Things Hidden Since the Foundation of the World. So it's this truth of mimesis and violence and the ways. So it's sort of part psychology, part anthropology, part history.

It's a portal onto the past, and to human origins. It's our history, it's a portal onto the present, onto the interpersonal dynamics of psychology. It's a portal onto the future in terms of:, are we going to let these mimetic desires run amok and head towards apocalyptic violence where even the entire planet can no longer absorb the violence that we can unleash? Or are we going to learn from this and transcend this, in a way where we get to some very different place.

And so it has a sense of both danger and hope for the future as well. So it's this panoramic theory in a lot of ways. Super powerful and just extraordinarily different from what one would normally hear. There's almost a cult like element where you had these people who are followers of Girard. And there was a sense that we had figured out the truth about the world in a way that nobody else did and that was generative and very powerful.

There are parts of it that are unhealthy, but it has an incredible dynamism. And then you are aware that maybe things are so different from how they appear to be that... there may be a portal out there.

I think the problems of violence and scapegoating are universal problems. It's probably the case that there are certain types of people who are more likely to become scapegoats, but it's not an absolute thing. You could say there's an arbitrariness about scapegoating because the scapegoat is supposed to represent, to stand in for everybody. So the scapegoat has to be perceived as someone who's radically other, but then also has to somehow emerge from within the group. There are times when the scapegoat is the outlier, extreme insider, extreme outsider, king/criminal or whatever personality.

That's probably a dangerous sort of thing. It's like Abraham Lincoln, the incredible orator who also grows up in a log cabin, these extreme contrasts are often people who are at risk of this maybe more than others. And then at the same time, because these are mob-like dynamics, there is a way in which it's not like anyone's really safe from the violence ever. No one's completely safe.

There is a thought that one of the history ideas that Girard had that is that there's a dynamic to this process where scapegoating, it only works when people don't understand it. As you understand it better, it works less well or it has to get displaced into other dimensions. If you have a witch hunt, say, we need to find a witch to bring back peace to the community, that's a psychosocial understanding of what you're doing is actually counterproductive of the witch hunt itself. The witch hunt is supposed to be a theological epiphany that God's telling you who the witch is. If you think of it as some sort of psychosocial control mechanism, then it won't work any more.

A metaphor that Girard uses is that the sacred is like phlogiston and violence is like oxygen, but it only works in a world where it's misunderstood. So if you understand scapegoating, you end up in a world where it works less and less well, and the kind of political and cultural institutions that are linked to it will tend to unravel. I think one of the ways in which this has happened a great deal in modernity is that we scapegoat the scapegoaters, go up one level of abstraction.

That always makes it a little bit more complicated. If we go after the people who were the historical oppressors, the historical victimizers, that's often a super powerful way, and it's slightly too complicated. There was a Bill Clinton formulation of this, "we must unite against those who seek to divide us", which is on some level itself contradictory, but then it's a little bit too hard for people to fully disentangle. That's one way that I think it still works even though when everyone sees these moves, when everyone understands them, it just doesn't work that well any more.

The theological terminology Girard would use would be that scapegoating is satanic and that archaic cultures were a little bit satanic but not very. They were sort of satanic in an innocent way because the violence was actually a way to limit violence, that violence is both the disease and a cure for the disease. We need violence to drive out violence. This is how our societies work. And then it's not quite clear how things will continue to work. You could always say that there is a sense in which - and this is super broad brush stroke-type argument - there's a way in which you can say that the Left is more focused on the unjustified nature of violence, and the Right is more focused on how a certain amount of violence is needed for society. There are ways in which they're both right, and then there are ways in which they're both deconstructing each other.

You could say a nation state contains violence in both senses of the word contain.

### We lack positive visions of the future
Culturally, the failure of an imagination, a different future, is seen in science fiction movies where if you look at all the science fiction films in the last quarter-century, they basically show technology that’s dystopian, doesn’t work, that kills people. So you can choose between the Terminator or the Matrix or Avatar or maybe – maybe if we don’t get Obamacare, Elysium. And that does not portray a future that’s radically different and better. I think the Star Trek retread movies are sort of an exception, but that’s still a throwback to the 60s. The Jetsons are a completely reactionary aesthetic at this point. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

Globalization is about some sort of convergence theory of history in which the developing and developed nations converge. And a lot of the rhetoric around globalization is implicitly anti-technological. And so when we split the world into developed and developing nations, this is a pro-globalization dichotomy but it’s also an anti-technology dichotomy because were implicitly saying that the developed world is that part of the world where nothing new is going to happen, where nothing is going to change, where things are basically stuck. And so I think the question that I would like to see us ask more is how can we develop the developed world or something – something like that.

The rhetorical version of this that I always think is striking is when were the last political speeches you can remember where people in very concrete terms portrayed a future that looks very different from the present? So you can imagine Martin Luther King: “I have a dream of a nation no longer divided.” And so it’s radically different from the present, a much better, a very different looking future. The last speech like this that I can really identify would be Reagan at Berlin – “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down that wall” – where it’s very concrete terms, a future that looks radically different and much better than the present. And somehow that works much less well.

During the Obama campaign in 2008, there was a subtle change in the way the slogan worked where you started with the slogan, “hope and change.” And in the course of the campaign, that slogan changed, to “the change we need.” And so in other words, a change from maximal change to the absolute minimum amount of change that’s absolutely necessary, which is quite a striking reversal because it turned out that change poll tested very badly; people were scared of change, they thought that change meant change for the worse, not for the better. And I think that is the sort of political malaise that you’re up against whether you’re a Democratic or Republican politician.

[Hope and change] is incredibly abstract and so the abstractions enable people to project onto it whatever they want to. But it suggests that there’s not going to be any specific leadership in one direction or another. But again I think this is not a problem limited to Obama or Clinton or the Democrats. I think it’s really these abstractions are very much across the board.

I think in politics or culture for the future to have power over the present, it has to be different from the present. The future has power because it's a time that will look different from the present and so it can't just be an endless Groundhog Day. If it's just always the same, it's just always repetition, then the future does not have any appeal and that's not part of a political agenda. And so if we look at Europe and we say, well, how will Europe be different from the way it is today in the future? I think there's sort of three pictures of a very different future, and behind door number one is Islamic Sharia law, and if you're a woman, you'll be wearing a burka. So that's a very different picture of the future, it's very concrete. Behind door number two is the Chinese communist AI, and it's the big eye of Sauron that will be watching you at all times and all places. That's door number two for the future. And door number three is the green movement, and you'll be puttering around in an E scooter and you'll be separating out your garbage in a recycling can. And then I think the challenge is that there are no other doors. Those are the three options. And this is a, even though I'm not a crazy environmentalist, this would be my sort of argument for why the green stuff has so much traction in Europe. If those are the only three options, I'll go with Greta. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

I would go with Israel over the UK if you forced me to list two [countries with positive visions]. But sure, let's say US, UK, Israel, I'll go with those three. UK's sort of half way between the US and Europe, so it's better than Europe and it's worse than the US. \[[10](https://www.evernote.com/shard/s542/client/snv?noteGuid=46c636b6-b404-45df-ab0a-1f84c6fdc8c2&noteKey=7c94233539b8258d72b395a063f3c589&sn)]

It’s not just the Right – the Obama Administration wouldn’t say that they can have strong substantive ideas of what to do. They can improve processes, but they would never actually think that you could actually build a very specific thing in a preplanned way. They don’t even believe in that anymore. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

It’s again feedback from things that are already working and we improve them a little bit; we’re all just going to climb up, go up the up-gradient and we may get stuck on a low-lying hill. Sometimes you have to step back and wonder where in the world do we find ourselves? Do we just simply go uphill? Do we end up on a low hill or do we really end up on Mount Everest? And we have all these hill-climbing theories, we have no valley-crossing, mountain-climbing theories, we need more of those kinds of things.

I think that there probably a whole set of things that came together and there was environmental damage, people became more aware of that. There was the nuclear weapons danger, people became more aware of. That was a way in which our society became somewhat more risk-averse. We replaced the scientists and engineers with lawyers and bankers, became more financially oriented less, less oriented towards certain other things, then let them play a whole set of reasons why it happened. It's quite hard to figure all of them out. \[[19](https://www.wbur.org/onpoint/2014/09/30/transcript-peter-thiel-wants-us-all-to-go-from-zero-to-one)]

I do think that if you look at this culturally: we at this point, live in a society, and in a world, a country, that dislikes science and technology in just about all its forms. We were always told that we have lots of technological progress. I think the reality is much more that the culture is very biased against the technology. The easiest way to see this, and this is always my challenge—people don’t agree with this—is challenge you to name me one science fiction film that Hollywood produced in the last 25 years in which technology is portrayed in a positive light, in which it’s not dystopian, it doesn’t kill people, it doesn’t destroy the world, it doesn’t not work, etc., etc. Instead, we have one sort of catastrophic, anti-technological scenario after another, and the future is some combination of the Terminator movie, and Avatar, and Elysium, and you know, The Matrix. I watched the Gravity movie the other day. You would never want to go into outer space. I mean, you want to be back on a muddy island somewhere on this planet. And again, I think Hollywood is not the sole source of this. To some extent, it mostly just reflects the broader culture, which I think at this point, is very anti-technological. Which is why I think Silicon Valley is sort of the center of the counterculture in our society today. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

### We think about the future in indefinite ways
Indefinite attitudes to the future explain what’s most dysfunctional in our world today. Process trumps substance: when people lack concrete plans to carry out, they use formal rules to assemble a portfolio of various options. This describes Americans today. In middle school, we’re encouraged to start hoarding “extracurricular activities.” In high school, ambitious students compete even harder to appear omnicompetent. By the time a student gets to college, he’s spent a decade curating a bewilderingly diverse résumé to prepare for a completely unknowable future. Come what may, he’s ready—for nothing in particular. A definite view, by contrast, favors firm convictions. Instead of pursuing many-sided mediocrity and calling it “well-roundedness,” a definite person determines the one best thing to do and then does it. Instead of working tirelessly to make herself indistinguishable, she strives to be great at something substantive—to be a monopoly of one. This is not what young people do today, because everyone around them has long since lost faith in a definite world. No one gets into Stanford by excelling at just one thing, unless that thing happens to involve throwing or catching a leather ball.  \[[16](https://www.amazon.com/Zero-One-Notes-Startups-Future/dp/B00M284NY2/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=zero+to+one&qid=1587710030&sr=8-1)]

Every culture has a myth of decline from some golden age, and almost all peoples throughout history have been pessimists. Even today pessimism still dominates huge parts of the world. An indefinite pessimist looks out onto a bleak future, but he has no idea what to do about it. This describes Europe since the early 1970s, when the continent succumbed to undirected bureaucratic drift. Today the whole Eurozone is in slow-motion crisis, and nobody is in charge. The European Central Bank doesn’t stand for anything but improvisation: the U.S. Treasury prints “In God We Trust” on the dollar; the ECB might as well print “Kick the Can Down the Road” on the euro. Europeans just react to events as they happen and hope things don’t get worse. The indefinite pessimist can’t know whether the inevitable decline will be fast or slow, catastrophic or gradual. All he can do is wait for it to happen, so he might as well eat, drink, and be merry in the meantime: hence Europe’s famous vacation mania.

After a brief pessimistic phase in the 1970s, indefinite optimism has dominated American thinking ever since 1982, when a long bull market began and finance eclipsed engineering as the way to approach the future. To an indefinite optimist, the future will be better, but he doesn’t know how exactly, so he won’t make any specific plans. He expects to profit from the future but sees no reason to design it concretely.

Instead of working for years to build a new product, indefinite optimists rearrange already-invented ones. Bankers make money by rearranging the capital structures of already existing companies. Lawyers resolve disputes over old things or help other people structure their affairs. And private equity investors and management consultants don’t start new businesses; they squeeze extra efficiency from old ones with incessant procedural optimizations. It’s no surprise that these fields all attract disproportionate numbers of high-achieving Ivy League optionality chasers; what could be a more appropriate reward for two decades of résumé-building than a seemingly elite, process-oriented career that promises to “keep options open”?

Recent graduates’ parents often cheer them on the established path. The strange history of the Baby Boom produced a generation of indefinite optimists so used to effortless progress that they feel entitled to it. Whether you were born in 1945 or 1950 or 1955, things got better every year for the first 18 years of your life, and it had nothing to do with you. Technological advance seemed to accelerate automatically, so the Boomers grew up with great expectations but few specific plans for how to fulfill them. Then, when technological progress stalled in the 1970s, increasing income inequality came to the rescue of the most elite Boomers. Every year of adulthood continued to get automatically better and better for the rich and successful. The rest of their generation was left behind, but the wealthy Boomers who shape public opinion today see little reason to question their naïve optimism. Since tracked careers worked for them, they can’t imagine that they won’t work for their kids, too.

Malcolm Gladwell says you can’t understand Bill Gates’s success without understanding his fortunate personal context: he grew up in a good family, went to a private school equipped with a computer lab, and counted Paul Allen as a childhood friend. But perhaps you can’t understand Malcolm Gladwell without understanding his historical context as a Boomer (born in 1963). When Baby Boomers grow up and write books to explain why one or another individual is successful, they point to the power of a particular individual’s context as determined by chance. But they miss the even bigger social context for their own preferred explanations: a whole generation learned from childhood to overrate the power of chance and underrate the importance of planning. Gladwell at first appears to be making a contrarian critique of the myth of the self-made businessman, but actually his own account encapsulates the conventional view of a generation.

The contrast of Germany and California I always like to give is that California is optimistic, but desperate, and Germany is pessimistic, but comfortable. But from a Californian perspective, the incredibly deep pessimism is really, really striking, and even on that one dimension, I think Jewish culture is super different. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

There certainly is some very mild anecdotal evidence that you can give. The anti luck argument is that there are certain people who succeeded in doing various businesses on a repeat basis. There's probably perhaps most famously Steve Jobs with Apple and Pixar; Jack Dorsey with Square, Twitter; my colleague Elon from PayPal who went on to start SpaceX and Tesla, was heavily involved in Solar City. Of course there's always a counter-narrative with these things. You can say well each of these people had just one big breakthrough and then everything else was somehow leveraged off of that. And so whenever you drill down on this question - was it luck, was it not luck - it's actually really hard to say. \[[25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZM_JmZdqCw&feature=youtu.be)]

It is striking, however, how much the way we talk about this has changed. And so if you go back in time, the classical way people used to talk about it was that luck was something to be overcome or to be mastered. So Thomas Jefferson: “I'm a great believer in luck and I find the harder I work the more I have of it”, which again suggests that it's this thing to to overcome, or that doesn't dominate things. Or even simpler, Samuel Goldwyn: “the harder I work the luckier I get”. Very much in contrast to that you have something like today's dominant view where success stems from this whole context, the context is random. Maybe you were a member of the lucky sperm club, the lucky egg club, you were lucky where you were born and stuff like that. And that is what drives everything and there's a version of this that applies to startups: that the successful ones were accidental, it's pretty clear how big a role luck plays. I agree with Paul Graham on an awful lot of things but again I think this is a place where it's just automatically channeling our default bias as a society and it's worth asking how much of this is true and how much is not true.

The classic version of indefinite optimism is a portfolio investing theory: it is that you should invest in a stock market index. That's the way you get the highest risk adjusted returns, because the motion of stocks is like the movement of atoms in the universe: it's fundamentally random and we can't know anything about it. We can maybe describe the laws, the statistical laws that describe the randomness. But what specific stocks or specific companies or specific projects you should invest in you can never know. But you know the stock market generally moves in a northeasterly direction and therefore the most important thing is to find the way to get maximum diversification at minimum cost and do something like portfolio investing. One of the strange things that happens in the shift from definite to indefinite views of the future is that there is this shift from engineering to finance and and and one of the things that happens is that money somehow becomes much more important. \[[25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZM_JmZdqCw&feature=youtu.be)]

In a definite world money is a means to an end because there are specific things you want to do with money. In an indefinite world you have no idea what to do with money and money simply becomes an end in itself, which seems always a little bit perverse. You just accumulate money and you have no idea what to do with it. That seems like a bit of a crazy thing to do but I think that's actually what happens a great deal. And so to illustrate one way that this flow might happen if you start a successful business, you sell the company or you sell shares to investors in an IPO, you make some money.  Question: what do you do with the money? You have no idea because nobody knows what to do with anything and so you give the money to a large bank to help you do something. What does the bank do? It has no idea so it gives the money to a portfolio of institutional investors. What does each institutional investor do? They have no idea and so they all just invest in a portfolio of stocks. Not too much in any single stock ever because that suggests you have opinions or you have ideas and that's very dangerous, because it suggests that you're somehow not with it. And then what do the companies do that get the money. They've been told that all they should do is generate free cash flows because if they were to actually invest the money in specific things that would suggest the companies had ideas about the future, and that would be very dangerous. And so one of the worst things you can ever have is a company that's not profitable in this indefinite world. And the contrarian idea that I always like saying is that we always like investing in companies that are losing money. We don't like investing in companies that are making money because the companies that are not profitable are actually the companies that have a lot of ideas about what to do with their money. Whereas a company that's massively profitable on some level is a company that's out of ideas. And it's especially crazy in a world where the interest rates are zero and you actually get paid less and less on the money and then of course the companies are profitable to generate cash flows. The cash flows eventually go back to people and you sort of cycle and repeat and this is the rough flow that happens in the world of indefinite optimism.

This is a bit of an extreme picture but in effect it's a hermetically closed loop and at the end of the day no one's doing anything real with the money, it's completely abstracted. And what ends up happening is there are fewer and fewer things you can do. And one of the financial ways to illustrate this is if you look at the real interest rates on a 10-year bonds in the US - which is a measure of how much interest you earn on bonds - it's basically been trending steadily downwards. Today it's at minus 0.6 percent, so 10-year bonds are yielding about 2%. The expected inflation for the next decade is 2.6 percent so when you invest in bonds in real terms you're expecting to lose minus 0.6 percent a year for a decade. And it shouldn't even be surprising because there's no one in the system who has any idea what to do with the money. This has been a consistent critique of the huge deficits the US is running, people constantly are saying there's a point where the bond market is going to blow up. And the interest rates will go higher and one of the really big mysteries is that this has not happened for year after year. And I think the the fundamental reason this has not happened is that people actually have no idea what to do with the money. The last big idea people had on what to do with money that was not circular was to buy houses and to invest in housing, and that was the idea of the last decade. That  idea has gone out of fashion. Now that people no longer want to buy houses they have absolutely no ideas what to do with money. The interest rates - the real interest rates - are going steadily more negative and so there's some sense in which this system of indefinite optimism is gradually running out.


### People are either in acceptance or denial
If you have this period of generalized stagnation, you could sort of accept it, you can deny it, or you can fight it. And the modalities that seem to dominate in our culture are acceptance and denial. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]
And probably the Republicans are more on the denial side, maybe a little bit less than before. The Democrats tend to be on the acceptance side. And what probably is really needed is to fight the stagnation or to fight the decline. Acceptance and denial, even though they’re opposites in some ways, they’re actually very similar in that both of them tell you at the core that there’s nothing to worry about, there’s nothing you can do, it doesn’t actually matter.
Men reached the moon in July 1969, and Woodstock began three weeks later. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see that this was when the hippies took over the country, and when the true cultural war over Progress was lost.
Today’s aged hippies no longer understand that there is a difference between the election of a black president and the creation of cheap solar energy; in their minds, the movement towards greater civil rights parallels general progress everywhere. Because of these ideological conflations and commitments, the 1960s Progressive Left cannot ask whether things actually might be getting worse. I wonder whether the endless fake cultural wars around identity politics are the main reason we have been able to ignore the tech slowdown for so long.
It’s always tricky, how do you get out of denial without going straight to acceptance, which seems to be the common modality. I describe this era of technological stagnation, it’s not meant to be demotivating. It’s meant to say: there’s a problem – and we could be doing a lot better on these things.
It strikes me that there are ways we don't want to wake up. We don't want to wake up in a way where it de-energizes us and demotivates. I think one of the ways I think these institutions worked was they took care of people, but it was also motivational. You study. You get good grades. You'll succeed in our system. One way, when you deconstruct these institutions, there's one direction that I think is always very dangerous, that it just shifts people into a much more nihilistic, very low energy mode where it's just, "Well, there's no point. Nothing can be done." That's the way that I definitively do not want to wake people up. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]
There are these paths that aren't really going anywhere and you shouldn't go down these paths. But then there's some other paths here that you need to take. There's a portal here that you need to look at. If we are just saying all the paths are blocked, I think probably the risk is people just sit down where they are and stop moving altogether. That feels like the very wrong way to wake people up.
The 1990s narrative was the new economy, and you lied about growth. And then the 2000s narrative was the Great Moderation, and you lied about volatility. And maybe the 2010s one is secular stagnation, where you lie about the real interest rates, because the other two don't work anymore. In a complicated way, these things connect. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]
But yes, new economy sounded very bullish in the '90s. Great Moderation was still reasonably long stocks, but sounds less bullish. And then secular stagnation - in the Larry Summers forms, to be specific to what we're talking about - means again, that you should be long the stock market. The stock market's going to keep going up because things are so stagnant. The real rates will stay low forever. So they are equally bullish narratives, although they sound less bullish over time.
And of course, I think the crazy cut on the '20s and '30s was that we didn't need to have as big of a crash. You could've probably done all sorts of interventions. Because the 1930s was still a period that was very healthy in terms of background scientific, technological innovation. If we just rattle off what was discovered in the 1930s that had real world practical things, it was: the aviation industry got off the ground, the talkies, the movies got going. You had the plastics industry, you had secondary oil recovery, household appliances got developed. And as you know, by 1939 there were three times as many people who had cars in the US as in 1929. There was this crazy tailwind of scientific and technological progress that then somehow got badly mismanaged, financially, by whoever you blame the crash on.
And so, I think that's what actually happened in the '30s, and then we tried to manage all these financial indicators much more precisely in recent decades, even though the tailwind wasn't there at all.

### Our expectations are self-fulfilling
There’s a great deal of hysteresis. So when things haven’t worked for a while, people do give up on areas. So Nixon declares war on cancer in 1970, says he will defeat it by the Bicentennial in 1976. 44 years later, by definition we’re 44 years closer to the goal but people don’t – people are less motivated today than they were in the 1970s. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And it would be inconceivable for someone like Obama to get on television and say we’re going to declare war on Alzheimer’s even though one-third of Americans at age 85 are suffering from some form of dementia. And so it would seem like the sort of thing that one should try to do something on. But it’s – it just does not resonate.

For my liking, people are too complacent and I do think there is this incredible self-fulfilling aspect. If you think you can do something, thinking you can do something is a necessary precondition for being able to do it. It may not be sufficient but it surely is necessary.

It was [Andrew] Wiles, the Princeton mathematician, solved Fermat’s last theorem, worked on it by himself for eight years, solved it after 358 years of people trying. And maybe it was impossible, maybe it was a fool’s errand to spend time on that. But if you didn’t think that you could do it, you were never going to be the person to do it.

I think there is a big hysteresis part to this where success begets success and then failure begets failure, where if you haven’t had any major successes in a number of decades, it does induce a certain amount of learned helplessness, and then it shifts the way science gets done or the way innovation gets done in to a more bureaucratic, political structure where the people who get the research grants are more the politicians than the scientists. You’re rewarded for very small incremental progress, not for trying to take risks. It’s led over time to a more incrementalist, egalitarian, risk-adverse approach, which I think has not worked all that well. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

When you have a history of failure, that becomes discouraging and so failure begets failure. No halfway sane parent would encourage their kids to study nuclear engineering today, whereas there are a lot of people going into software. The history of success in software is encouraging more people to go into it and drive more innovation. Then the history of failure in these other areas has been very discouraging. What I think would start, if you got some signal successes in other areas, that can then set a precedent and you can somehow get what’s been a vicious cycle into a virtuous cycle. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

To build a better future, you have to I think first convince people that it's possible. You have to get people to work. And so there's always a self-fulfilling aspect. We think it's not possible. People won't work on it and it won't happen if we think it's possible, we will work on it and it might very well happen. I don't think it's going to happen as a mass movement, as a mass political change. I think it's much more likely to happen in small groups in new companies, new ventures - could be new non-profits. But I think it's got to be much easier to convince small groups to work on what you want. Start with maybe twenty or thirty rocket scientists at the core of SpaceX, rather than some mass political movement. \[[19](https://www.wbur.org/onpoint/2014/09/30/transcript-peter-thiel-wants-us-all-to-go-from-zero-to-one)]

Somehow our society is not as inspired by science or technology which is why I think progress is more likely to happen in small groups in our time or not at all.

### We’re too conformist
What’s amazing about these top U.S. institutions in the U.S., whether academic or law firms, banks is that from the outside, they’re places where everybody wants to get in. And then once you’re – once you’re in them, it turns out that it’s always fairly constricted. You have enormous numbers of very talented people. So that’s the aspect that’s very positive. But then it’s also, it ends up being – involving a ferocious amount of competition for what I think are often relatively small stakes. Where at Sullivan & Cromwell, the New York law firm I was at, you have eighty very talented people start every year, four or five might make partner after seven or eight years. And it was very unclear even for the people who became partner how much impact they would have on the broader world. So you have some of these people who are incredibly ambitious going in, and sort of gradually gets wrung out of them over time. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I do think that Silicon Valley, the technology industry, is still an exception to this, where we’re living in a society, where the frontier is not as wide open as it was in the 19th century. Geographically, maybe you can still go to Alaska but there aren’t that many places one can move to where there’s wide-open space left. Technology, I think, is one place where that still exists and where it is possible for a small group of people to start something new that has a big impact on the world as a whole.

It’s always this question whether it’s that good to always be looking at the people around you and getting feedback from them in different ways. There’s this very strange aspect in Silicon Valley where so many of the very successful entrepreneurs and innovators seem to be suffering from a mild form of Asperger’s or something like this. I always wonder whether this needs to be turned around into a critique of our society where if you don’t suffer Asperger’s, you get too distracted by the people around you. They tell you things, you listen to them, and somehow the wisdom of crowds is generally wrong. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

The Malcolm Gladwell wisdom of crowds book, it always – there’s a very specific thesis that it has, which I believe is true. Then, there is the way the term always gets misused. The specific thesis is that the wisdom of crowds works if everybody in the crowd is thinking independently for themselves. So if we have a jar of marbles, and everybody guesses how many there are, then somehow the collective judgment ends up being better than most individuals’ judgments. But if you have a more common way, the wisdom of crowds works through this sort of hyper mob-like behavior where I think you get a lot of irrationalities. You get the wisdom of crowds becoming the madness of crowds. It becomes a bubble in finance or something worse in politics when it goes very wrong.

They’ve done these studies at Harvard Business School, which I often think of consisting of the opposite of Asperger-like people. People who are extremely socialized, extremely extroverted, have relatively few convictions of their own. [But] good work habits. You put them in a two-year hothouse environment in which they spend two years talking to one another trying to figure out what to do, which leads to this very dysfunctional wisdom of crowds dynamic where you will simply – because none of the other people have thought about it for themselves and have any independent ideas – and they’ve done studies on this where systematically the largest cohort at Harvard Business School goes into always the wrong thing.

1990 they all wanted to work for Michael Milken one or two years before he went to jail. They were never that interested in tech except 1999, 2000 when they descended on Silicon Valley en masse and timed the end of the dot com bubble perfectly. And on and on. There is something about this that’s very tricky where probably a lot of innovation, creative thinking, doing things that matter generally depends on not being so beholden to the people you’re immediately around. Even though you get feedback, and the feedback is helpful. There are these cases where it can go very wrong.

My prior is there is a lot more innovation that could happen so if the feedback mostly is a form of anti-theories – “can’t do that, that’s too bold, that doesn’t quite make sense.” In a world where a lot of innovation is still possible, this sort of horizontal feedback probably has a very bad dampening effect. If we’re in a world where in fact everything’s been discovered, everything big has been discovered, this sort of feedback would stop people from wasting their lives on some sort of quixotic quest of one sort or another. So it does depend some on what your priors are.

If I had to make a judgment on it, I think we are in a world where these feedback mechanisms have gotten far too powerful, where people are too easily swept up by these mob dynamics. I’m certainly not going to go on your TV show and blame this on the Internet in any way. But you have to ask whether there are ways some of these technologies have maybe even exacerbated some tendencies that were already there in our society. The phenomenon of political correctness, there are many ways to describe it, but certainly one is you have these incredibly powerful negative feedback effects that get brought to bear and have this very inhibiting character, and I don’t think it actually results in things being far more generative than they otherwise would be. It cuts off a lot of lines of inquiry, but I don’t think that means it opens up that many more.

And I think one of the things that I’ve come to really appreciate over the years is how powerful these psychosocial forces in our society are that basically push people’s thinking into a homogenizing kind of direction. And it’s on the level of the larger economy in the U.S., we’ve had this extraordinary history of bubbles in the last few decades, which clearly had a psychosocial component where people were not thinking very much for themselves. You had an Internet bubble in the 90s, an even crazier and more destructive housing and finance bubble in the 2000s. And I would argue even dumber and bigger and worse government bubble in the 2010s. But all these things were characterized by extreme lack of critical thinking, assuming that other people had figured things out and deferring to that in one way or another.

And so whenever you see a situation where it’s very hard for people to think critically on their own, you have to sort of wonder whether there’s something very off on this. There was – and I think you can often get these unconventional truths through means – I’m not sure what the right terminology is, but you could sort of describe it as a political approach where you ask the question what are the things people can’t say or can’t think. And maybe there’s a natural or metaphysical approach where you just try to figure out the fundamental truth of things. And I always have a preference for the political approach because I think it’s so much more straightforward, and kind of a shortcut.

So by way of example, in the last decade in Silicon Valley, 2002 to 2008, there were basically two major things one did as a venture capitalist: you invested in the next generation of Internet companies or you invested in clean tech. And the next-generation Internet companies generally worked pretty well. Clean tech was an unmitigated disaster. And the critical question was, how could you have figured this out early?

And the sort of the scientific, natural, metaphysical type of approach would have been to evaluate every single clean technology on its merits and then you have to figure out, were people lying about it, were they distorting the results, how far were things off? And one could have done that, but it would have been, would have been extremely hard to figure this out.

The political approach was to realize that there were a set of intensely held conventions that people could not question. There were things around it involving social status, it seemed cool for people to be involved in this, and they were not that interested in whether it made any sense. And that’s why clean tech was not just an initial set of bad investments but why maybe ten times as much good money was thrown after bad in the 2005-2008 period.

We need to ask, what is it about our society where those of us who do not suffer from Asperger’s are at some massive disadvantage because we will be talked out of our interesting, original, creative ideas before they are even fully formed? \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

We’ll notice that’s a little bit too weird, that’s a little bit too strange. Maybe I’ll just go ahead and open the restaurant that I’ve been talking about, that everyone else can understand and agree with, or do something extremely safe and conventional, and therefore hypercompetitive, and probably not that great as an idea. I’d say a lot of these people may not understand this larger theory about society, but they are somewhat oblivious to it, and it pushes progress.

I learned that I was incredibly prone to this problem of social convention. If you want to give it a religious terminology, the psychological terminology would be that I had a rolling quarter life crisis in my mid-20s. The religious terminology, I had a quasi-conversion experience where I realized the value system was deeply corrupt and needed to be questioned.

I do think that one of the ways of challenging convention, one way, the Asperger’s way, is just to be vaguely oblivious to it all, and continue apace. Then I think there is another modality where you just become aware of how conventional our conventions really are, and then that becomes an indirect route of trying to start thinking for yourself.

I worry that the conformity problem is actually more acute than it was in the ’50s or ’60s, so that the category of the eccentric scientist, or even the eccentric professor, is a species that is steadily going extinct because there is less space for that in our research universities than there used to be.

It’s very hard to measure these things or calibrate them, but I think that in politics, the conventional approach is to simply look at pollsters. What are your positions going to be? You just look at the polls, you figure this out, and it works fairly well.

At the end of the day, that’s probably not how the system really changes. It probably will be changed by some idiosyncratic people who have really strong convictions, and are over time, able to convince more people of them. But whether this means that we have more or less change is hard to evaluate. It always comes from these somewhat nonconventional channels.

I think it’s a little bit unfair to just pick on the business school context. I think it’s a very general, very endemic context that we find competition extremely validating, and it is always super-misleading. The academic version of this, I think, was articulated well by Henry Kissinger when he described his fellow professors at Harvard as saying you know, the battles in academia are so ferocious because the stakes are so small. And we always think of this as some sort of definition of insanity. Why would you fight like crazy? You fight like crazy if the stakes are big. Why would you fight like crazy if the stakes are small? And it’s in part, it’s of course when people are not differentiated, the differences get very small. You fight over less and less, so it is both a definition of insanity, but also a working out of the logic of the situation. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

[Bill Kristol: Do you have the sense that this psychosocial conformism, or herd mentality, or whatever you want to call it, is stronger now than it was 20 years ago, 40 years ago, 60 years ago or is it just the way democracy is, kind of Tocquevillian?] \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

It’s always hard to compare. I do worry that there are elements of it that are somewhat stronger. We’re living in a more globally connected, more transparent world; it often seems more dangerous for people to express unconventional ideas because there’s a record of that and so people maybe are censoring themselves more than they were – more than they were 50 years ago. There are a lot of things where I find that somewhat worrisome. I’m not going to get this quote exactly right, but there’s the Nietzsche line that madness is rare in individuals but in nations and crowds of people, it’s the rule. That was before Nietzsche himself went mad.

I do think there’s something, there is something very peculiar about the history of the bubbles that we’ve been experiencing in the last few decades, which is quite anomalous. There was an enormous bubble in the 1720s, there was one in the 1920s. But we’ve had maybe four or five of roughly the same magnitude in the last 30 years. And so I do think if you were looking at EKG chart of the health of the world and you started seeing all these up-and-down spikes, it might be a mistake to say that everything is normal, and very sane, and under control.

If you’re one of a very large crowd that’s trying to do something, there’s always this question, what’s even the point because it’ll happen anyway, you won’t make that much of a difference relative to what you could otherwise do.

We always think of Japan as this hyper-imitative, noncreative culture of extreme conformity. My suggestion is that perhaps at this point, Japan is the least conformist, the least imitative country in the world. There’s actually a lot of interesting aesthetic cultural stuff going on, there still is a lot of very successful types of businesses. There’s innovation in food production, all sorts of interesting areas. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

But then it’s an indictment of the West, where I think Japan is no longer the Japan of the Meiji Restoration of the 1870s, or the Japan of the cheap plastic imitation toys of the 1950s. It’s a country that no longer thinks it can get that much by copying the West. There’s probably still some narrow interest in IT and software. Outside of that, I think they are copying the US and Western Europe less and less.

People aren’t even learning English that much anymore. They’re speaking less English than they were 15, 20 years ago. The golf courses are all getting shut down and converted to solar farms or something; people don’t even want to play golf anymore. I think we need to take this as a real critique of our society, very seriously, that they’re finding less that’s desirable to imitate in the US or Western Europe.

If you are able to push unpopular causes, that’s very good. Then, the Zen-like problem, the paradox, is that you have a lot of impact, if you are able to push a good, worthwhile, but unpopular cause. The Zen paradox is that it’s very hard to market it and get money to do it. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

That’s the tension that it’s worth thinking through really hard. I think most nonprofits fail at this, where they end up supporting things that are super conventional, they can get funding for them, but if they didn’t do it, there’d be 100 other people doing it.

Always having a counterfactual sense of mission is important. If we weren’t doing this, nobody else in the world would be doing this. To the extent that’s not true, you want to make that more true. Maybe it’s a spectrum, but you want to always tilt more in that direction.

On the business side, on the nonprofit side, I always differentiate mission-oriented businesses, which have this counterfactual sense of importance, from social entrepreneurship. Anything that has a social element to it — the word social is very ambiguous. It can mean, number one, good for society. It can mean, number two, good as seen by society. In practice, the second meaning always ends up dominating the first. Then, you end up with the “me too,” lemming-like, sheep-like clones, where you lose every raison d’être.

It's not like we get all the benefits of transparency with none of the costs. They come with a very, very high cost. I do wonder if one of the strange dynamics with the younger generations in the US is that there's a sense that you're just constantly watched. There's this great Eye of Sauron, to use the Tolkien metaphor, that's looking at you at all times. It would be good if you could act the same way and if something bad happened, we could take care of you. But if you're always being watched, I suspect it really changes your behavior. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

Competition makes us better at that which we're competing on, but it narrows our focus to beating the people around us. It distracts us from things that are more valuable or more important or more meaningful. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

It was Aristotle that said, "Man differs from the other animals in his greater aptitude for imitation." It's how we learn languages. It's how culture gets transmitted. But it also leads to all sorts of bubbles, all sorts of insane madness-of-crowds-type behavior. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

So I always like to flip this around. What is it about our society that somehow talks all of the people who don't have Asperger's out of their original ideas before they're a little bit too weird? Why do we push people to do things that are much more conventional? It's an anti-Asperger's personality, and it’s often actually quite bad for innovation.

Originality is hard. You don’t get to be original if you dress up like a hipster and you wear all the same fashionable clothes the other fashionable people wear. So there’s a lot of stuff where we always pretend that creativity, originality, all these things are somehow super easy. And the reality is they’re very, very, they’re very hard. Already in the time of Shakespeare, the word ‘ape’ meant both primate and to imitate. It was Aristotle I believe, however you say it, man differs from the other animals, and has greater aptitude for imitation. So there is this imitation aspect to human nature that runs very deep. It’s how we learn language as kids, it’s how culture gets transmitted. But it also leads to many forms of insane behavior. It leads to insane peer pressures, it leads to market bubbles, manias, and so I think trying to find a way to be original is quite difficult. I think in practice, again, I don’t think there’s a formula. This is how you do these five steps and you will have an original idea. There’s no easy formula, but if you described it, it often starts by not being that focused on the people around you, being really passionate about some idea, or something more transcendent. And that’s what drives a lot of innovation. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

### We think about risk in the wrong way
Even this concept of risk is a very strange concept. One of the things you can do on Google is search for words and the frequency in which they occur in books over time. If you look at the word risk over the last 200 years, from 1800 to 2000, it’s a very infrequent word. Very rare until about 1970. And then it goes up at an incredibly steep curve. And it becomes much more common in titles – How to Manage Risk, How to Take Risks – and so the thought I’ve been wondering about is whether a lot of talk about risk is actually even counterproductive to risk. If you have a risk that if your kids are left unsupervised in the playground that they’ll be kidnapped, or if you have risk that this can go wrong, or that can go wrong, or a risk that somebody is going to die from some new medical treatment, that risk is actually this word that’s used to discourage people from doing anything. It’s more and more a frequent occurrence is a symptom of society where less and less good risk-taking is actually taking place. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

There’s all these ways where I wonder whether the focus on the processes of risk-minimization distracts you from the substance and ideas and figuring things out, of doing new things. And so I think definitely something like that seems to have been very much at work. I think that – let me see how to put this – one of things that’s true about risk is that it is this very probabilistic way of thinking about the future where the future is dominated by chance, by fortune, and that’s this all-powerful force that dominates everything. And I think it’s one of the questions that I think is very unclear is this in fact a deep truth about the universe or is it more about the abdication of our responsibilities?

As a venture capitalist, the temptation is always: you look at a company and you say, “Don’t really know if it’s going to work or not, and I’m just going to invest a small amount and see what happens.” The temptation is to treat all these companies as lottery tickets, but once you treat them as lottery tickets, I’ve found you somehow psyched yourself into losing. You’ve already psyched yourself into writing too many checks a little bit too quickly, and you’re not actually making a statement about the inherent chanciness of the universe, you’re actually making much more a statement about your own laziness and your own unwillingness to think things through. I do wonder if there is something like that that gets obfuscated by this talk about risk where it always sounds like it’s a statement about the larger world but it may really be more a statement about the failure of our ability to think things through. Maybe it is hard to precisely model these things out or something like that.

In the case of start-ups and very innovative businesses, it’s always quite unclear to me how you even talk about risk or probability. And so you can talk about it if you can do an experiment many times and see what happens over and over again. So you did high frequency trading on Wall Street, that has a probabilistic character where you can probably model the risks very, very precisely. But, if you’re investing in a one-of-a-kind company, I don’t even know how you’d go about measuring what the risks are, how you would quantify it, and if you have a sample size of one, standard deviation’s infinite so in theory you can’t say anything about the risk. If Mark Zuckerberg started Facebook over again 1,000 times, how often would it work? We don’t get to run that experiment. And so somehow risk-orientated processes, they make sense in a context of large N – insurance, the context of large N. Millions of people driving cars so many have accidents, you can model it out. Life insurance policies, actuarial science, these are the large N sciences.

But I think there are a lot of very important that are small N, or even N equals one. Very small number. And if we’re too beholden to these risk-models, I think we just don’t do those kinds of things, and they may be very important.

The way I would put it is if you had a perfectly running insurance scheme, it would probably collapse under its own weight eventually. And so if you think of our education system as largely an insurance policy – the universities are largely this insurance policy for upper middle class parents who are scared that their kids are going to fall through the ever bigger cracks in our society – it can sort of work. But are we really going to have a future in which everybody’s insured and isn’t that a recipe for disaster over time.

A super-low risk thing, there are parts of it where it can work, but it probably can’t work universally. And I don’t think it can work remotely as extensively as it has been done. In ways, I was guilty of this. I went to law school, the low risk, seemingly low-risk thing to do from undergraduate in the late 1980s, early 90s, when I went to law school. It was this fairly low-risk way to get an upper middle class career in a big law firm.

In retrospect, it’s turned out to be quite high risk for the people who did it because there were far too many people who did it. It worked well for a few years, then a lot of things just tend to go wrong, even for the people who come out of these very successful, tracked kind of places. If you wanted to date this, that’s maybe 1965 or 1970, if you’re graduating from college, there was actually a way you could do a low-risk, very successful career, so few people were doing it that if you – and there was a way you could arbitrage this risk successfully. Don’t think that’s been working terribly well. I think that’s been working less and less well for the last 30-40 years. Even as it’s been understood better and better.

If you’re talking about starting a business and saying, “We’re going to just do this random walk, we’re going to do A/B testing of different types of products and see what people want, we’re going to have no opinions of our own and do all this testing of customers.” The problem is the search space is just way too big. There are way too many things you can do, you don’t have enough time to go through this sort of statistical surveying and feedback mechanism. A lot of the things that have worked the best have been sort of paradoxically not so probabilistically beholden. If you look at Steve Jobs, Apple, where it was – you have something like the Isaacson book on Steve Jobs, where it portrays him as this tyrannical boss who just yells at people all the time.

Even if all of that is true, it doesn’t seem to me to get at why did it work at all? Why did it inspire people? I think it was because there was a plan, you’re going to execute against it, and you could pull off some really incredible things that you could never do if you just did everything through this sort of instantaneous feedback from different kinds of things. I think complex planning, complex coordination, these are the kinds of things that’s gotten very hard to do in this sort of probabilistic society. I describe to you a complicated plan, in a technological context, you’d think it was like a Rube Goldberg contraption. It’s just not going to work. Something is going to break. Because we think of every step as probabilistic. We think of the steps as more deterministic. You just have to get the different steps to work.

You can actually have a Manhattan Project, there’s no reason you can’t do this, there’s no reason even the government can’t do this. It actually did in the 1940s. You can send a man to the moon with Apollo. You certainly should be able to do a website for the Affordable Care Act since that’s demonstrably a lesser, demonstrably inferior technology to Apollo or Manhattan.

One aspect that I think is somewhat disturbing is certainly that there’s this sort of probabilistic thinking that again creeps into the AI issue as well. If you meet someone in Silicon Valley who believes that AI is possible, it’s happening soon, and it’s potentially dangerous. These are three very widely held beliefs. The fourth thing that you can always push back on them – you don’t want to question those three beliefs – but the fourth one, that’s a very powerful one to question back is, well, you have no idea on how to build one that’s safe, and you couldn’t build one that’s safe. The way you’ve defined the problem that you’re going to build a superior mind that will be able to outthink you, you won’t be able to build it in a way that’s safe.

One of my colleagues was talking to one of the top AI researchers and pushed him on this, and it was basically, “Professor, you obviously don’t believe any of your theories about AI because if you did you wouldn’t be publishing any of it on the Internet, because when the AI emerges, it will read about it on the Internet, and it will hide to not make you aware of how powerful it has become.” So there is something akin to that that’s implicit in all of this where if the optimistic case about technological possibility is true, there’s this sense of helplessness in terms of what people can actually do about it. It’s very much linked to this rather dystopian view, and this gets reflected in the Hollywood movies. I cannot think of a single movie from Hollywood about AI that doesn’t have a dark and rather disturbing undercurrent to it.

Again, I think it’s the sort of probabilistic reasoning that technologies are out of our control, there’s no human agency, we can’t actually know what we’re doing that gives it this very strange quality. Of course, there is a sense in which the term AI simply means that human intelligence isn’t up to the task so one other way of interpreting the AI boom is that on the surface, it is about extreme optimism about the potentialities of computer technology, and the beneath the surface, it is simultaneously, perhaps, a great deal of pessimism around the possibilities in other technologies that will be developed by humans, and deep pessimism about the possibility of what humans can do.

Sort of a man with a hammer sees a nail everywhere. One interpretation I have of the AI bubble is that again, in a strange way, it’s symptomatic of the technology stagnation thesis.

Waiting on this AI to save us from all these things, and don’t know whether it will be friendly or not. It has this very strangely passive aspect where it’s somehow – there’s not enough room for human agency to my liking.

If you want to use a Thomistic category, you can distinguish the intellect and the will. Medievals believed in the weakness of the will but the power of the intellect. Moderns tend to believe in the power of the will but the weakness of the intellect. And so I use a slightly different metaphor: if you have an evangelical Christian Bible study, the outward-facing thing is that people are moral and that they’re good Christians; the inward-facing thing is that you’re sinful and if you say, well I’m in this Bible study and I’ve figured out that I’m a really good person, you’ve somehow not quite got the message. \[[13](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-straussian-moment)]

Now to transpose this to a modern rationalist meetup. The outward-facing thing of modern rationalism is that you’re more rational, better able to think through things than other people, you’re one of the Brights as I think Dawkins liked to put it. The inward-facing thing is that you’re not capable of thought, that it’s basically your mind is full of spaghetti code, you can’t believe how bad people are thinking through things, and that’s I think the sine qua non of enlightenment rationality at this point.

And we see in all sorts of forms: we do not trust people’s ability to think through things at all any more in the 21st century. I think on the cultural side, the mania we have around AI is because it stands for the proposition that humans aren’t supposed to think. We want machines to do the thinking, but it’s because we’re in a world where individuals are not supposed to have intellectual agency of any sort anymore. We don’t trust rationality. We can maybe believe in the wisdom of crowds, we can believe in big data, we can believe in some sort of mechanistic process, but we don’t believe in the mind.

What I think people like Zuckerburg or Musk or Jeff Bezos at Amazon have in common is that they’re relentless. They don’t stop. Every day, they start over, do more, get better at it. People often ask whether Facebook was just a fluke, in the right place at the right time. But I think the more you get to know Mark or founders like him, the less plausible it becomes. And that’s, in part, because you can see how hard he works, how much planning it was, how much of a vision there was from the very beginning. \[[18](https://tim.blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/28-peter-thiel.pdf)
### Left-wing ideology has become deranged
[Peter Robinson: In 2016, how many professors at the top five law schools endorsed Donald Trump?] \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

Zero. And the law school example's interesting because a lot of academic fields are more internal to academia, but law is one that cashes out in a governmental political context, and taking a contrarian position in theory is quite valuable. If you're a tenured law professor at Harvard, and you're the only law professor at a top law school to endorse Trump, I don't know, I think there would be like a 50% chance you would've gotten nominated to the Supreme Court or something like that. So it seems like it's the sort of thing where the contrarian thing would be quite valuable, and then if nobody takes that bet, I mean, wow, there must be some unbelievable enforcement mechanisms, and it's sort of like a gentle version of North Korea. But even though you have tenure, it's like, wow, they can relegate you to some broom closet and play loud music or something. They'll figure out some way to punish you.

On the technology side, I think that Silicon Valley will continue producing great companies, but perhaps not as many. … There are certain pluses and minuses to Silicon Valley. The big advantage is that you have all the talent, all the capital in one place, and so you have these extraordinary network effects, and that’s been a motor of Silicon Valley for a long time. \[[14](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v_NhYV63K5E)]

But there’s a point where network effects go very wrong, and where the network effects - the fact that everyone’s super connected, everyone knows what everyone’s thinking, everyone ends up thinking the same thing, it shifts over into the madness of crowds. And I think we’ve gotten to the point where perhaps the negatives are greater than the positives.

I do think there’s something different when it goes from a large majority having one way, to it being almost unanimous, because things are never unanimous. When people are unanimously on one side, that tells me not that they've all figured out the truth but that they are in a totalitarian place, that they are in a one-party state where they are not allowed to have dissenting views. I think somehow Silicon Valley has shifted from being quite liberal, to being a one-party state.

Our greatest political problem is the problem of political correctness, properly understood, because that’s how we limit the debate, how we aren’t allowed to consider all the possibilities. And certainly I think the universities share a lot of blame for this, the education system shares a lot of blame. But the pushback - you just have to try to push back in every specific context where you find it, and say: the real debate is not this super narrow debate, there’s a much broader range of possibilities we should be considering.

In recent years, Silicon Valley has become completely deranged. This one's actually hard for me to explain because it's a remarkable shift, certainly, from 20 years ago. I would say that there is a question how much innovation is actually happening that I always come back to, where I'm somewhat on the side that we've had generally limited progress in technology and science the last 50 years. There was a very big exception in computer software, Internet, mobile Internet, the last quarter century. This was this narrow cone of progress in the world of bits that really drove things. And I wonder if there's actually less innovation possible even in those areas at this point. And so if you look back over the last five years, let's say, there have been fewer new consumer Internet companies that have come out, and maybe the easy ideas have been picked, maybe we need to move on to other areas but the other areas are regulated and difficult, so biotech or all kinds of futuristic science areas are deceptively hard, and we're in a zone where the returns accrue to the larger companies. So if you say, if you're in an early innovative boom phase, like the dot-com boom in the '90s, it's all startups, it's in small companies that you start new things. When I started PayPal in 1998, one of the questions I was always asked was why can't a big bank just do this? And I never really had a good answer to it. I now think the answer is roughly that most big corporate institutions are very political, they're very slow, they're not actually good at innovating, and that's why you have startups, that's why you have small companies, that's why you're able to merge and the big banks are too political to do anything new. And so if you can do something new and you can do it reasonably quickly there's space to do this. And I think the ratio of these bigger to smaller ones has shifted a lot and it is probably just a less innovative place. And then this cashes out in all sorts of ways politically. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

These things are always overdetermined. You can say it's linked to California. California was a 50/50 Republican Democrat state 40 years ago, now it's a D plus 30, it's the second most Democratic state in this country and so there's a way in which the environment pushes it. There's probably a degree to which the workforce in Silicon Valley is the most educated in the country, has the most advanced degrees, college degrees and advanced degrees, and from the elite universities, and maybe the more education you have the more brainwashed you are, and so there's a version of that. But I think there are parts of it that seem completely unhinged. Elizabeth Warren is taking out these banners saying that she would, in Silicon Valley these billboards saying that she would break up Facebook, Google, Amazon for antitrust. Maybe it's shifted a little bit but the first two, three quarters of 2019 among Google employees, and I think Google's the craziest of the big tech companies, Elizabeth Warren got a plurality of the donations. She got more donations than anybody else. And so if she were, by some miracle, to get elected I think she would be able to argue that even the people at the big tech companies think they should be destroyed. And so there are parts of it that seem just completely deranged in ways I can't fully explain.

I don't think the intellectual battle is ever fully over because I don't think history's over, and I would say if anything, if I had to characterize the intellectual landscape, we've been in a world for a very long time in which somehow the range of intellectual debate has gotten more and more narrow, and the Overton window's shifted to the left but generally in an ever narrower way. And you could sort of say that we've been in a bear market for ideas I think for something like the last 50 years. And so a lot of the people you cited I think of as pre the late 1960s and that in last 50 years if you had crazy ideas, if you had ideas that were outside the box, those were always bad and you got clobbered and you couldn't get tenure, you couldn't get funding because everything was peer reviewed up the wazoo. And I think we're now at a point where we've been in such a long bear market for ideas and the Overton window is so uncomfortably narrow that I would be long ideas more than at any other point in the last 50 years. I think we're not gonna find solutions inside the intellectual straitjacket in which our universities and our society put us and I think there will be positive returns to ideas greater than there have been in the last 50 years.

The visceral problem with communism is not its redistributive tendencies. It's the extreme violence. It's that you have to kill tons of people. One of the professors I studied under at Stanford, René Girard, was a great philosophical, sociological, anthropological thinker, and he had this observation that he thought communism among Western intellectuals became unfashionable. You could date it to the year 1953, the year Stalin died, and the reason was they were not communist in spite of the millions of people being killed. They were communist because of the millions of people who were being killed. As long as you were willing to kill millions of people, that was a tell, a sign that you were building the utopia, you were building a great new society, and when you stopped, it was just going to be like the lethargy of the Brezhnev era or something like that, and that that was not inspiring. I mean, people shifted from Stalin to Mao or Castro, but the violence was charismatic, very charismatic, but then also, if you think about it, it's very undesirable. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

I don't want to make this too ad hominem, but I want to say that people like your [Eric’s] family, were likely very intelligent people, were somehow still always the useful idiots, and there was no country where the communists actually came to power where people like those your family actually got to make the decisions.

Somehow, maybe there were indirect ways that it was helpful or beneficial in countries that did not become communist, but in countries that actually became communist, it didn't actually ever seem to work out for those people.

[Eric Weinstein: Things were very different, and there was no clear place to turn.] Yeah, it's always easy for us to judge people in the past too harshly, so I think that's a good generalization. I would say that there's something about the extreme revolutionary movements that always seem to be... From my point of view, the violence was always too much, and it's a package. It's a package deal, but I don't like the violence part of the package, and that's the part that, at the end of the day, makes me think the package would not have been worth it.

I felt this was a dynamic that was going on in all these strange ways in 2016. There was a dinner I had in San Francisco about a week before the election with a group of center right people. One of them was a very prominent angel investor in Silicon Valley, and he said: I'm voting for Trump in a week, but because I'm in Silicon Valley, I have to lie. And so he was unusually honest about lying. And the way I lie is that I tell people I'm voting for Gary Johnson. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

So he couldn't say that he was going to vote for Hillary Clinton. Like the facial muscles wouldn't work or something would go wrong. But Gary Johnson was the lie that you could tell. And then if you actually look at what happened in the month before the election, the Gary Johnson support, collapsed from, I don't know, something like six to two percent or whatever

And as far as I can tell, all of that went to Trump. And the question one has to ask is were these people lying all along? Were they lying to themselves? Did they sincerely change their mind in the last month? Or some combination of that. But yeah, one vehicle for this preference falsification was that you had a third party candidate who was a gateway to the transition, this is what happened with Ross Perot, where the people eventually went to Clinton in '92 or John Anderson in 1980. So that's been repeated and I think that was one element of what was going on.

But then I think there were also all these aspects of, of the Trump candidacy, that people were super uncomfortable about polite society. That the preference falsification was somehow perhaps much greater than in many other past contexts. And so, even the day of the election, the exit polls suggested that Trump was going to lose. And so there was still a two to three percent effect like this, literally the day of the voting.

Of course, one of the complicated questions in all this is: did people actually already sense this? And were they lying about this? So, like everybody was saying all the way throughout 2016, most of the people were saying, well, there's no chance that Trump's going to win. This is absolutely impossible.

And I didn't really connect this before the election, but with 2020 hindsight, I wonder: was the fact that everyone was clicking on the Nate Silver 538 statistical polling model site a few times a day, to reassure themselves that Hillary Clinton was still ahead, was going to win. Was that some sort of acknowledgement that on some, maybe subconscious or barely conscious level, people sensed that it wasn't really as done a deal as they were constantly saying.

So, there's even a version of that question that I wonder about. Because there was something about the polling that took on this unusually iconic role in 2016, it was so important and there was no truth outside the polls. I remember there's one of the Democrat talking heads saying something like Republicans don't believe in climate change. They also don't believe in polls. That's why they're going to lose. And generally polls are right, but there was something about how all-important they were in 2016 that might've been a tell that something was a little bit amiss.

This question of preference falsification, the Timur Kuran theory, is tightly coupled to this question of how intense is the problem of political correctness: how much pressure is there on people to say things they don't actually believe?

I always come back to thinking that the problem of political correctness in some sense is our biggest political problem. That we live in a world where people are super uncomfortable saying what they think, that it's sort of dangerous. And to use the Silicon Valley context, it's a problem that Silicon Valley has become a one party state. But there are two different senses in which you can be a one party state. One sense is that everybody just happens to believe this one thing. And then the other one is in which 85 percent of people believe one thing and the other 15 percent pretend to. And it's a dynamic with super majorities where in a democracy, we think 51 percent of people believe something, they're probably right; if 70 to 80 percent believe something, it's almost more certainly right. But if you have 99.99 percent of the people believe something, at some point you shifted from a democratic truth to North Korean insanity.

And so there's a subtle tipping point where the wisdom of crowds shifts into something that's sort of softly totalitarian or something like that. So in my mind, it maps very much onto this question of the problem of political correctness. It's always hard to measure how big it is in a politically correct society. Of course, we're just saying what we think. We all love Stalin, we all love Chairman Mao and, and maybe we're just singing these songs because we're all enthusiastic about it. And my read on it is: that problem has gotten more acute in a lot of parts of our society over the last few decades.

On this very superficial layer, we want to have debates on a lot of areas, a lot of hard questions, and questions in science and technology and philosophy and religion, there're all these questions that I think it would be healthy to debate.

And there's a way in which political debates are a low form of these questions. And there's one sense in which I think of these political questions as less important or less elevated than some of these others, but there's also a sense in which these questions about politics are ones that everyone can have access to. And so if you can't even have a debate about politics, you can't say, you know, I like the man with the strange orange hairdo or I like the mean grandmother. If you can't even say that, then we've sort of frozen out discussion on a lot of other areas. And that's always one of the reasons I think that political correctness starts with correctness about politics. That when you aren't allowed to talk about that area, you've implicitly frozen out a lot of others that are maybe more important and where we're certainly not going to have a debate about string theory if we can't even have a common sense debate about politics or something like that.

I'm very sympathetic to this distraction theory that what's going on in our society is like a psychosocial, magic, hypnotic magic trick where we're being distracted from something very important and political correctness, identity politics and maybe American exceptionalism, these various ideological systems, are distracting us from things. The thing I keep thinking of, the main thing it's distracting us from, is the stagnation and it's that there are these problems that we don't want to talk about in our society. It's possible it's also a way to distract us from bad thoughts that we have about people.

But the one I would go back to first is just that it's distracting us from dealing with problems. The reason we have a newspeak, this sort of Orwellian newspeak in politics with these zombie politicians, Hillary Clinton or Jeb Bush or whoever it might be, is that we're not supposed to talk about the real issues and maybe they have a bad conscience and they think they're bad people. But I think the primary thing is just too dangerous to talk about what's actually going on. They don't know what to do about it and better not talk about that.

This is always maybe naive hope on my part. But I always think that when we can't talk about things, we can't solve them and that maybe these are the calculations you make and this is the way we pat people on the head, even though they're never going to get ahead. But it's never going to work. And people aren't that stupid and they will eventually figure it out. And so that's why I'm undermotivated to play that game. But, I'm always like this, where I'm always quite hopeful that people realize there's a lot of bad faith acting and they discount this accordingly.

I was extremely disturbed by Gawker a decade, decade and a half ago because I think it was a really powerful thing at the time where it worked because people didn't understand how it worked. It was this hate factory, the scapegoating machine, but people didn't see it as such. And because of that it was super powerful. Once you see how it works, once you understand it, it is less powerful. So even had I not succeeded in the litigation against Gawker, I think it would be a weaker version of that today. There are of course equally nasty things on the internet, but they're not as powerful because there's more transparency into the bad motives and people get it, and the hate factory only works when it's not perceived as such.

When I was a kid, the great debate was about how to defeat the Soviet Union. And we won. Now we are told that the great debate is about who gets to use which bathroom. This is a distraction from our real problems. Who cares? Fake culture wars only distract us from our economic decline. \[[20](https://time.com/4417679/republican-convention-peter-thiel-transcript/)]

### Are we just hitting natural limits?
To the extent you see it as a technological problem, or a scientific problem, one approach has been that you’re just hitting natural limits. This is a Tyler Cowen, The Great Stagnation, a recent book by Robert Gordon, another economist, The Rise and Fall of American Growth. This idea that there were some fairly simple inventions, the 19th, the early 20th century, that maybe the rate of innovation peaked as far back as the late 19th century where you had incredible numbers of breakthroughs and it’s just the nature of the world, of the universe that it’s much harder to find new things. The low-hanging fruit has been picked. And therefore we have to resign ourselves to far reduced expectations and a more austere future. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

[Bill Kristol: You only invent antibiotics once. I mean, massive gains in public health by a huge breakthrough like that, where half your population isn’t dying from infections basically and public health disasters and in infancy. You can’t replicate that.]
Those are the arguments on the nature side. I’m a little bit more partial to the culture side on this. That perhaps there never was any low-hanging fruit. The fruit was always at least intermediate height, and it looked pretty high up.
Certainly, we have a situation where one-third of the people at age 85 suffer from dementia or Alzheimer’s, so if you could do something about that, that would probably be close to as big as a deal as antibiotics. We’re living in a world where people don’t even expect that to happen anymore, I think.
[Bill Kristol: You go from horse and buggy to trains to airplanes but what’s -] But supersonic jets don’t quite work, so you’re stuck at airplanes, let’s say. The alternate explanation which I’m more partial to is, that it is a cultural kind of thing. And that even though there probably are some areas where progress objectively is very hard, there are many areas where we could, we could still have progress if we really wanted to have it. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And so it’s always this question – is it an external reality that’s made it hard or is it something in the culture that’s changed that makes us less ambitious, more risk-averse, more scared to try to do things? And I do think the regulatory double-standard where we have massive regulation in one place and very little in the other suggests that something like that might be going on.

One striking example is something like the SDI program in the 1980s, where I remember at the time, the debates were: the conservatives argued this was a good thing because it would be a defensive technology. The liberals argued it was going to be a bad thing because it meant the U.S. would have a first-strike nuclear capability. But everybody assumed it was going to work. And 20 years later, it is implicitly assumed that it’s never going to work. Even though I have things like the Iron Dome technology in Israel, which works remarkably well.

And it would seem that if you applied yourself you could have extended these sorts of technologies to things like intercontinental type missiles and things like that. It’s harder, but it doesn’t feel like the sort of thing that would be impossible.

So I’m very heavily on the cultural bias. I think it’s always the part that people are more uncomfortable because it suggests that there was some sort of generational failure versus just external circumstances that are outside of people’s control. So I think we’re always too biased to go to the natural explanation because it’s one that exonerates us from responsibility for the slowdown.

I think one way to parse this question of scientific, technological stagnation is sort of nature versus culture. Did the ideas in nature run out? Or, at least the useful ideas. Maybe we make some more discoveries, but they're not useful. Easily useful. So it's a problem with nature. And then the cultural problem is that there was actually a lot to be discovered or a lot that could be made useful, but somehow the culture had gotten deranged. And I go back and forth on those two explanations. I think it's very complicated. Yeah, I think in physics you'd say ... I mean, probably even the fundamental discoveries stopped after the mid 1970s, but certainly the translation didn't happen. Quarks don't matter for chemistry, and chemistry's what matters on a human level. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

I would say there was a lot that happened in biochemistry. Not chemistry down, but sort of chemistry up; the interface between chemistry and biology. And that's where I would be inclined to say there's a lot more that could happen and has not quite happened, because maybe the problems are hard. But maybe also the cultural institutions for researching them are restrictive. It's too heavily regulated in certain ways and it's been just somewhat slower than one would have expected in the 1970s.

Obviously, if nature has stopped, then the culture is going to derange. So there's a way in which culture is linked to nature. And then if the culture deranges, it also will look like nature stops. There are probably elements of both.

But I am always optimistic in the sense that I think we could have done better. I think we could do better. It's not necessarily the case that we can advance on all fronts in every direction, but I think there's more space on the frontier than just in this world of bits. So I think there are various dimensions on atoms where we could be advancing and we just have chosen not to.

I'd be pessimistic on physics generally, so that’s my bias on that one. Biology, I continue to think we could be doing a lot more, we could be making a lot more progress. The pessimistic version is that no, biology is just, is much harder than physics, and therefore it's been slower going. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

The more optimistic one is that the culture is just broken. We've had very talented people go into physics. You go into biology if you're less talented. You can sort of think of it in Darwinian terms. You can think of biology as a selection for people with bad math genes. If you're good at math, go to math, or physics, or at least chemistry, and biology we selected for all of these people who are somewhat less talented. So, that might be a cultural explanation for why it's been been slower progress.

If you're a string theory person, or even an applied experimental physicist, I don't think you can that easily reboot into biology. I mean, these disciplines have gotten more rigid. It's pretty hard to transfer from one area to another.
