---
layout: post
title: "What is going on?"
date:   2021-07-14
categories: Thiel
---
This is the first of a series of posts outlining Peter Thiel's views on progress and stagnation.

## We’re in an era of technological stagnation
In the last 40-50 years, we have had enormous innovation in the world of bits, and somewhat less in the world of atoms: clean tech, energy, more generally, transportation, biomedical. \[[3](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/peter-thiels-notes-on-startups/)]
When tracked against the admittedly lofty hopes of the 1950s and 1960s, technological progress has fallen short in many domains. Consider the most literal instance of non-acceleration: We are no longer moving faster. The centuries-long acceleration of travel speeds — from ever-faster sailing ships in the 16th through 18th centuries, to the advent of ever-faster railroads in the 19th century, and ever-faster cars and airplanes in the 20th century — reversed with the decommissioning of the Concorde in 2003, to say nothing of the nightmarish delays caused by strikingly low-tech post-9/11 airport-security systems. Today’s advocates of space jets, lunar vacations, and the manned exploration of the solar system appear to hail from another planet. A faded 1964 Popular Science cover story — “Who’ll Fly You at 2,000 m.p.h.?” — barely recalls the dreams of a bygone age. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

The official explanation for the slowdown in travel centers on the high cost of fuel, which points to the much larger failure in energy innovation. Real oil prices [in 2011] exceed those of the Carter catastrophe of 1979–80. Nixon’s 1974 call for full energy independence by 1980 has given way to Obama’s 2011 call for one-third oil independence by 2020. Even before Fukushima, the nuclear industry and its 1954 promise of “electrical energy too cheap to meter” had long since been defeated by environmentalism and nuclear-proliferation concerns. One cannot in good conscience encourage an undergraduate in 2011 to study nuclear engineering as a career. “Clean tech” has become a euphemism for “energy too expensive to afford,” and in Silicon Valley it has also become an increasingly toxic term for near-certain ways to lose money. Without dramatic breakthroughs, the alternative to more-expensive oil may turn out to be not cleaner and much-more-expensive wind, algae, or solar, but rather less-expensive and dirtier coal.

Warren Buffett massively capitalized on both of these trends with his $44 billion investment, most made in late 2009, in BNSF Railway — making it the largest non-financial company in the Berkshire Hathaway portfolio. Understandably, the Oracle of Omaha proclaimed “an all-in wager on the economic future of the United States” and downplayed any doubts he might have harbored. For present purposes, it suffices to note that 40 percent of railroad freight involves the transport of coal, and that railroads will do especially well if the travel and energy consumption patterns of the 21st century involve a regression to the past.

In the past decade, the unresolved energy challenges of the 1970s have broadened into a more general commodity shock, which has been greater in magnitude than the price spikes of the two world wars and has undone the price improvements of the previous century. In the case of agriculture, at least, technological famine may lead to real old-fashioned famine. The fading of the true Green Revolution — which increased grain yields by 126 percent from 1950 to 1980, but has improved them by only 47 percent in the years since, barely keeping pace with global population growth — has encouraged another, more highly publicized “green revolution” of a more political and less certain character. We may embellish the 2011 Arab Spring as the hopeful by-product of the information age, but we should not downplay the primary role of runaway food prices and of the many desperate people who became more hungry than scared.

While innovation in medicine and biotechnology has not stalled completely, here too signs of slowed progress and reduced expectations abound. In 1970, Congress promised victory over cancer in six years’ time; four decades later, we may be 41 years closer, but victory remains elusive and appears much farther away. Today’s politicians would find it much harder to persuade a more skeptical public to start a comparably serious war on Alzheimer’s disease — even though nearly a third of America’s 85-year-olds suffer from some form of dementia. The cruder measure of U.S. life expectancy continues to rise, but with some deceleration, from 67.1 years for men in 1970 to 71.8 years in 1990 to 75.6 years in 2010. Looking forward, we see far fewer blockbuster drugs in the pipeline — perhaps because of the intransigence of the FDA, perhaps because of the fecklessness of today’s biological scientists, and perhaps because of the incredible complexity of human biology. In the next three years, the large pharmaceutical companies will lose approximately one-third of their current revenue stream as patents expire, so, in a perverse yet understandable response, they have begun the wholesale liquidation of the research departments that have borne so little fruit in the last decade and a half.

The things that do work are often on a scale that’s incredibly modest. There is often a way in which humor is used to hide disturbing truths from ourselves. People made fun of technology in the early 20th century; the humor was to disguise how scary it was, how much it had changed, how drastic it was. Today, it’s like people throwing virtual cats at each other on the Internet or something like that. The humor, we make fun of technology to hide from ourselves the disturbing fact of how trivial it is, how small it is. People are still worried about what’s going on, but I think it has a very different feel from what it did 100 years ago. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

There is a Marxist theory that the time for Communism would come when interest rates went to zero because the zero percent interest rate was a sign that capitalists no longer had any idea what to do with their money. And there were no good investments left, which is why the interest rates went to zero, and therefore the only thing to do at that point was re-distribute the capital. It doesn’t mean that zero-percent rates lead us to socialism, but I find it alarming that rates are as low as they are. \[[13](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-straussian-moment)]

You have Moore’s law on the one hand. If I had to simplify it, we’ve had incremental but relentless progress on the computer side. And on the other hand, we’ve had basically no progress on energy. And if you think about where oil prices were in 1973 - it was $2 a barrel - it is now [in 2012] at north of $100 a barrel. And so you’ve had catastrophic failure of energy innovation, and it’s basically been offset by computer innovation. I think that’s a simplified account of what’s happened in the last 40 years. \[[15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IzAW18s3Wg)]

Google also has $50 billion in cash. It has no idea how to invest that money in technology effectively ... if we're living in an accelerating technological world, and you have zero percent interest rates, you should be able to invest all of your money in things that will return it many times over. The fact is you're out of ideas.

I'd say 1968, the narrative progress seemed intact. By '73, it was somehow over. So somewhere in that five-year period. The 1969 version was: we landed on the moon in July of 1969 and Woodstock starts three weeks later. And maybe that's one way you could describe the cultural shift. You can describe it in terms of the oil shocks in 1973 at the back end. With the benefit of hindsight, there were things that were already fraying by the late 1960s, so the environment was getting dramatically worse. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

You have The Graduate movie [saying] you should go into plastics. I think that was 1968 or '69. So there were things where the story was fraying, but I think it was still broadly intact in 1968, and somehow seemed very off by '73.

This isn’t the dream we looked forward to. Back when my parents came to America looking for that dream, they found it right here in Cleveland. They brought me here as a one-year-old and this is where I became an American. Opportunity was everywhere. My dad studied engineering at Case Western Reserve University, just down the road from where we are now. Because in 1968, the world’s high tech capital wasn’t just one city: all of America was high tech. \[[20](https://time.com/4417679/republican-convention-peter-thiel-transcript/)]

Tesla and SpaceX are not IT companies. They have this very different feel and there's this sense that they're so valuable because they're so rare. I think it's one of the things that makes Elon Musk as charismatic as he is. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

When we talk about how fast science is progressing, we do it with little precision. Are we accelerating in scientific and technical fields? How fast is this?  In response, we get fairly vague answers. I would submit that the consensus in both a Silicon Valley and academic context is that we are doing great and that everything is just moving super fast. All these forms of accelerations.  And we can debate whether it’s utopian - Kurzweil with the singularity is near, where all you need to do is sit back and eat some popcorn and watch the movie of the future unfold, or this dystopia, all the science fiction movies from Hollywood and all the robots will kill you, or you’ll be in this matrix - we’re either accelerating to utopia or accelerating to dystopia. The somewhat contrarian thesis I have on this is that perhaps the progress is not as fast as advertised. Things have been slower and have been slower for quite some time. \[[26](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ufm85wHJk5A)]

## We’ve fallen far short of past expectations

Certainly, if we went back to, say, 1968, the late 60s, and you asked where would people have thought the world would be by the year 2000, 2015, 2016, it’s fallen way short. If you look at the Back to the Future movie – Back to the Future I was 1985 – they went back in time 30 years, and things had changed quite a bit from ’55 to ’85. Still a decent amount of changes. Back to the Future II went from ’85 to 2015, 30 years into the future. It was about a year, a little under a year ago. That was a world that was supposed to be radically different, and I think the actual day-to-day changes, outside of computers, would have been quite modest in those 30 years. I would argue since the 1970s. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

And so you can rattle off these different areas – whether it’s biotechnology, where there has been some progress, but it seems to have decelerated. Space travel, transportation, more generally. All kinds of ideas people had in the 50s and 60s about reforesting the deserts or underwater cities, or all kinds of things like this. Fusion. New forms of nuclear power, that at this point all have this sort of retro future feel. The future the way it used to be. Star Trek feels very dated. These things feel very dated in their optimism about how much could be done.

In his 1967 bestseller The American Challenge, Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber argued that accelerating technological progress would widen the gap between the United States and the rest of the world, and that by 2000, “the post-industrial societies will be, in this order: the United States, Japan, Canada, Sweden. That is all.” According to Servan-Schreiber, the difference between the United States and the rest of Europe would grow from a difference of degree into a difference of kind, comparable to the difference between Europe and Egypt or Nigeria. As a result of this steady divergence, Americans would face less pressure to compete: \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

[Servan-Schreiber: In 30 years America will be a post-industrial society ... There will be only four work days a week of seven hours per day. The year will be comprised of 39 work weeks and 13 weeks of vacation. With weekends and holidays this makes 147 work days a year and 218 free days a year. All this within a single generation.]

We need to resist the temptation to dismiss Servan-Schreiber’s space-age optimism so that we can better understand how the consensus he represented could have been so terribly wrong.

[NASA] is this very large agency that has kind of lost its way over the last 30 to 40 years. When we went to the moon, it took less than a decade from the time Kennedy announced it to the time we got there. Mars is harder but surely possible. \[[24](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/fashion/peter-thiel-donald-trump-silicon-valley-technology-gawker.html)]

You know all the classic versions of science fiction cities: underwater, cities on the moon, cities on Mars cities in outer space. Radically different and very definite ideas of the future, that would become self-fulfilling prophecies of one sort or another. And when you look at these pictures today, these things don't look futuristic, they look dated. They look like they really are sort of from the past, which is again this very strange way in which things have changed. \[[25](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iZM_JmZdqCw&feature=youtu.be)]

It's possible that some of these things just don't work. And maybe, maybe jet packs are just a bad idea. We have a title on our website. "They promised us flying cars. All we got was one hundred forty characters." Flying cars, maybe they're good, maybe they're bad but, but it's remarkable how all the various things people envisioned. And we've gotten so few of them outside of the, outside of the computer area. \[[19](https://www.wbur.org/onpoint/2014/09/30/transcript-peter-thiel-wants-us-all-to-go-from-zero-to-one)]

Let’s talk about the history of the future - the way people talked about the future in the past, and where they thought the computer age was going to go. If we’d been assembled in 1969, the future of computers was going to be massive centralization. IT was giant databases, giant AI like computer intelligences that would run everything. It was IBM that would run everything. It was HAL. It was one of the early star trek episodes - they come to the planet Beta, where thousands of years earlier someone had unified the planet and set up a computer program that ran the whole planet. The future of the computer in 1969 was centralization, large governments, large companies. Fast-forward to 1999. The future of the computer age was going to be massive decentralization. Libertarian, anarchist. Information had this decentralizing tendency. The internet was going to fragment things. Fast-forward to 2019. The consensus view has swung back to 1969. Google and world governments that control the world’s information in a centralized way. The Life After Google thesis that I agree with and enforce is that if people got this wrong in the past … perhaps the contrarian thing to say is that things can swing back towards more decentralization, more privacy, and things like that. \[[26](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ufm85wHJk5A)]

## There’s been stagnation in wages

When you look at this question of how much technological progress has been happening, we get into all these complicated measurement issues. The one that I cite as the big data point is that if you look at the US in the last 40 years, 1973 to today, median wages have been stagnant. Mean wages have gone up maybe a small amount, not very much. The 40 years before that, 1932 to 1972, they went up by a factor of six. If you looked at how people did from ’32 to ’72, you had a sixfold improvement. And it was matched by incredible technological progress - cars got better, you had the aeronautics industry got started, you went from no planes to supersonic jets, computers were invented… You had all sorts of incredibly important dimensions on which progress took place. I agree that we’ve had certain narrow areas where there’s been significant progress, but it’s very odd that it hasn’t translated into economic wellbeing. \[[15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IzAW18s3Wg)]

If meaningful scientific and technological progress occurs, then we reasonably would expect greater economic prosperity (though this may be offset by other factors). And also in reverse: If economic gains, as measured by certain key indicators, have been limited or nonexistent, then perhaps so has scientific and technological progress. Therefore, to the extent that economic growth is easier to quantify than scientific or technological progress, economic numbers will contain indirect but important clues to our larger investigation. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

The single most important economic development in recent times has been the broad stagnation of real wages and incomes since 1973, the year when oil prices quadrupled. To a first approximation, the progress in computers and the failure in energy appear to have roughly canceled each other out. Like Alice in the Red Queen’s race, we (and our computers) have been forced to run faster and faster to stay in the same place. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

Taken at face value, the economic numbers suggest that the notion of breathtaking and across-the-board progress is far from the mark. If one believes the economic data, then one must reject the optimism of the scientific establishment. Indeed, if one shares the widely held view that the U.S. government may have understated the true rate of inflation — perhaps by ignoring the runaway inflation in government itself, notably in education and health care (where much higher spending has yielded no improvement in the former and only modest improvement in the latter) — then one may be inclined to take gold prices seriously and conclude that real incomes have fared even worse than the official data indicate. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

This dismal and straightforward conclusion tends to be obscured by a range of secondary issues, which are important but do not really change the larger point about trends since 1973  [7]:

- Mean incomes outperformed median incomes (inflation-adjusted in both cases), and there was a trend towards greater inequality. Median incomes rose by only 10 percent. Mean incomes rose by 29 percent, which works out to a glacial pace of only about 0.7 percent per year - much slower than in the preceding four decades.
- Non-wage benefits, mostly health care, increased by about $2,600 per worker, for an additional 0.2 percent per year since 1973. So if the U.S. government has underestimated inflation by only 0.9 percentage points per year, then mean wages and benefits have been completely stagnant.
- Corporate profits increased from 9 percent to 12 percent of GDP - again, a significant but easily exaggerated shift.
- Women were hired in the 1980s and men were fired in the 2000s.
- College graduates did better, and high-school graduates did worse. But both became worse off in the years after 2000, especially when one includes the rapidly escalating costs of college.
- The era of globalization improved living standards by making labor and goods cheaper, but also hurt living standards through increased competition for limited resources. Free-trade advocates tend to think that the first effect dominates the second.
- Economic progress may lag behind scientific and technological achievement, but 38 years seems like an awfully long time.

Even though there’s always this sense that STEM, we need more STEMs for science technology, engineering, math. I suspect even STEM is a bit of an abstraction. And probably the only engineering fields that are doing really well are computer science and maybe, at this point, petroleum engineering. And most other areas of engineering have been bad career decisions the last 40 years. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

When I was an undergraduate at Stanford in the 80s, probably the top engineering profession was electrical engineering and that was not a great field to go into. You’d work in these very large companies and the semiconductor revolution kept going for a while but it was probably not that good a career decision. And electrical engineering was still much better than say nuclear engineering, aerospace engineering, which were really catastrophic decisions for very talented people to go into. So even though rhetorically we always say that we want more science and engineering people, in practice, these have been extremely tough fields. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

You have the sort of intergenerational thing where our generation, Gen X, has had a tougher time than the Boomers. The Millennials seem to be having a much tougher time than either us or the Boomers had. So there seems to be this generational thing. So there are some of these sort of macroeconomic variables that seem pretty off. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

## Internet progress masks other deterioration
I do think that if you were to sort of broaden the perspective on the last 40 or 50 years, we are living in a world where there has been significant innovation in information technology, computers – both hardware, software, Internet, mobile Internet. And much less in everything else. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

If you were to be even more critical, you could say that all these gadgets and devices, they dazzle us but they also distract us from the ways in which our larger surroundings are strangely old. So we run cell phones while we’re riding in a 19th-century subway system in New York. San Francisco, the housing stock looks like it’s from the 50s and 60s, it’s mostly quite decrepit and incredibly hard to change these sort of things. So you have bits making progress, atoms are strangely very stuck.

We find we either talk about a specific success and general success or specific failure and general failure. And so we would like to say Facebook is a specific success, it must mean some general success. And so Facebook is a great business, and therefore it will solve all the world’s problems. And I think the modality I prefer to think of is, that there are specific successes but they may be symptomatic of general failure. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And so Facebook will not solve all the world’s problems. But it may still be a great business. And that’s not a critique of Facebook. We shouldn’t turn Facebook into a scapegoat for the lack of innovation elsewhere. But the challenges that it is so anomalously unique and that there so few other companies like this being built in general. So I tend to think that the story of specific success that masks generalized failure is one we find very hard to tell. On our website, we have this tagline – “They promised us flying cars and all we got was 140 characters.” Which is a little bit of a dig at Twitter. But in some sense Twitter is probably a great business. The thousand people who work at Twitter are going to have well-paying jobs. I suspect it will last for decades. It’s probably not enough to take our civilization to the next level. But again it’s a mistake to blame Twitter for that. It’s more a problem with not enough happening elsewhere.

Even a company like Uber where you have this major innovation, I often wonder whether it’s more symptomatic of the failure of certain political structures. The vision in the 50s and 60s was that you’d build very high-speed transport systems, which the San Francisco Bay area, where I live, were basically vetoed by local zoning ordinances, it’s this very second-best solution because you couldn’t build the much faster kinds of things that people thought were natural in the 50s or 60s to develop. It again, it’s a compensating device for the dysfunction of our cities. Where there is not enough parking so you don’t want to drive your own car. You can never find a parking space. The public transportation systems don’t work. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

All of these things that are dysfunctional, but then we have this innovation to ameliorate the dysfunction. But if the political systems worked better in our cities, we might be doing some very, very different types of things.
There are questions about how healthy it is, at this point, even within [IT]. So the iPhone is now looking the same as it did seven, eight years ago. So that's the iconic invention. Not quite so sure. And so there's been sort of a definitely a change in the tone even within Silicon Valley in the last five, six years on this. But that had been one that was very, very decoupled. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]
The decoupling itself had some odd effects, where if you have sort of a narrow cone of progress around this world of bits, then the people who are in those parts of the economy that have more to do with atoms will feel like they're being left behind. And so there was something about the tech narrative that didn't necessarily feel inclusive, didn't feel like everybody was getting ahead. And one of the ways I've described it is that we live in a world where we've been working on the Star Trek computer in Silicon Valley, but we don't have anything else from Star Trek. We don't have the warp drive, we don't have the transporter, we can't re-engineer matter in this cornucopian world where there is no scarcity. And how good is a society where you have a well-functioning Star Trek computer, but nothing else from Star Trek?

[Twitter] is like all these technologies, where we see information technology everywhere except in productivity statistics. Email is the paradigmatic example where it's changed the way we communicate tremendously but it takes so much time that it's only made things, I would say, moderately more productive. Change and progress are not synonyms. You can have something that represents enormous change but only a small amount of progress. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

We've had tremendous amounts of innovation in IT going back to the ‘70s and it's led to moderate increases in productivity. It's not a new phenomenon. For us to really have greater productivity gains as a society, we have to do things more in the world of atoms and not just the world of bits. The problem is reflected in the word technology itself. Normally, it means information technology, whereas in the ‘50s or ‘60s, it would have meant rockets and underwater cities and desalination plants that turn deserts into farmland.

## AI is not making as much progress as people think


### [Bill Kristol, 2016: Are we at some tipping point for AI capabilities?] \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]
It’s very hard to say. I [have] many somewhat conflicting thoughts on this, I don’t necessarily want to come down very strongly on one side or the other of these debates. I would say that certainly computers generally are an area where there’s been a lot of progress so it’s maybe not unreasonable to maybe ask the question, how much more progress could there be? How many more ways could AI happen?
On the other hand, one of the things I don’t particularly like about artificial intelligence is it’s become such a buzzword. I think these buzzwords often always obscure more than they illuminate. One of the ways to see that it is a buzzword is to see how ambiguous it is. Artificial intelligence can mean both the next computing, the last computing that humans will ever build, and everything in between. So it has this rather elastic meaning. When artificial intelligence means the next set of computers, it sort of pushes the conversation in somewhat more automation, replacing certain low-skill or medium-skill kinds of activities people are doing. When you talk about it as the last computing device where you’re building a mind that can outthink and outwit any human being, you end up with these very scary, somewhat political questions. Is it going to be friendly? Is it dangerous? And if something like that can be developed then maybe it will be on par with extraterrestrials landing on this planet where I think the first question would not be about what would this do to the unemployment rate? The first question is are they friendly or not? The first questions would be political.

I would say that certainly the sort of bullish AI consensus that exists is that we’re making progress very quickly. There are no deep reasons why computers couldn’t do everything better than what humans do. And this may indeed happen in the next few decades. This would, of course, be an extraordinarily important and transformative set of changes. I’m certainly open to all these perspectives, but I also wonder whether there’s certainly parts of this that one could question.

If you had to be a little bit more critical of it, the two points of criticism would be, to first start with the history where people have been in some ways too optimistic about AI for quite some time. In 1970, there were people who said you’d get computers to understand language and everything humans could do within a decade. Same thing would have been said in 1980. We’ve been here before. So there’s been a history when this had turned out to be more difficult than people would have thought.

Then, of course, there’s always this sense of whether it’s maybe just a particular moment in time where at the peak of a technology cycle, the only thing we can worry about is technology that’s so good that it’s too fast and it changes things too radically. There was – in spring of 2000, there was this essay that got a huge readership in Silicon Valley by Bill Joy, one of the founders of Sun Microsystems. It was “The Future Does Not Need Us.” How runaway technology would get rid of people. And, so as a socio-cultural observation, a psycho-social observation, in spring of 2000, what we should have worried about was not whether the technology was going to work so well that it would be this runaway progress, but the real question was whether it was working at all? Were the business models working? And it turned out a lot of things didn’t work that well, and we had a period when people went back to banking and back to consulting from Silicon Valley. B to C and B to B didn’t mean business to consumer and business to business, it meant back to consulting and back to banking. So anyway I do wonder whether the sort of mini-AI bubble that we’ve seen in the last few years is maybe symptomatic, that we’re at some local peak in optimism about how much Silicon Valley is doing and can do, all these sorts of things.

Again, my worry with all these things is if anything, there’s not enough happening. If you take the biggest innovation [in AI] that people are talking about now, it’s self-driving cars. I think there are one or two million people who are employed as drivers. Maybe one and a half or two percent of the workforce, maybe, in that ballpark. Maybe it would increase efficiencies because you could get some work done in the car while you’re driving to the office. Maybe it could lead to five percent increase in GDP in the whole economy. Maybe I’m underestimating it somehow. I think it would be a significant change, but it wouldn’t necessarily take, double our GDP or anything remotely like that. The fact that that’s the most transformational change we can imagine is again, perhaps, is, to my way of thinking, strangely unambitious.

So this is better than 140 characters. Maybe they can park themselves, you don’t have to look for parking. In theory, it could help congestion a lot. In theory, it could take a lot of pressure off parking spaces and things like that. And then at the same time, the fact that this is the technology that’s iconically the most radical that we can sort of concretely describe – it’s more than Twitter, it’s not quite vacation trips on the moon.

Self-driving cars would be, I would say, almost as big as the car itself. I would still say the original invention of the car was bigger than the self-driving car. If you had to give the rough qualitative [estimate].

I generally find myself a bit skeptical of all the AI-themed discussions that we have at this point. I think it’s still quite a bit further away than people think. It feels like a bit of an extreme consensus that AI is just around the corner, it’s about to happen. [12, from 2015]

It would take a lot longer to explain all my misgivings about it, but I think it fits a little bit too much into this conventional inequality narrative, that we have rapid technological progress, and the only problem is that people won’t have jobs, they’ll be replaced by computers. I suspect that’s not quite correct. I think the whole AI story is, if anything, happening more slowly.

The data point people always give is self-driving cars. The fact that they always come up with the same example suggests that maybe there’s not that much to it. Even if you got — and I think self-driven cars would be significant — it might replace at most 1 percent of the workforce, it might increase productivity by a few percent in the economy. If you phased them in over a decade, it would not be that transformative.

Yes, if we have runaway automation, and if we're building robots that are smarter than humans and can do everything humans can do, then we probably have to have a serious conversation about a universal basic income or something like that, and you're going to end up with a very, very weird society. I don't see the automation happening at all, and I think the question of automation in my mind is identical to this question of productivity growth. We've been automating for 200, 250 years, since Industrial Revolution, agriculture and manufacturing, and the sort of society we have in the early 21st century is one in which most jobs are non-tradable service sector jobs that are not easily automatable. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

So, it's like a waiter in a restaurant. It's a yoga instructor. It's a nurse. It's a kindergarten teacher. That's what most jobs in our society are, and because they've been so resistant to automation, that this may be one of the reasons why the productivity numbers are slowing down, even if we're still innovating as fast in manufacturing, and even if we're still agriculture, they're a smaller and smaller part of the economy. So, even 5% a year productivity growth in manufacturing, that means a lot more if manufacturing is 60% of the economy, than it does when it's, say, 20% of the economy. So, that's roughly what I think would happen, and if you just look at the current dynamic in the US as we have unemployment, like 3.6%, 3.7%. It's super low, and still, there doesn't seem to be that much wage pressure. There doesn't seem to be that much growth. The productivity numbers still aren't great. You'd think there'd be enormous incentives to increase productivity. But I think, again, my read on it is just the automation story has been oversold. It's possible it's going to happen. It's possible it's just around the corner, and it's about to happen. That's what we've been told in a lot of these areas over the last 40, 50 years.

Amazon is the most threatening of the big tech companies in that it's threatening a lot of other companies elsewhere in the industry and disrupting them and making things more efficient, but probably with a lot of sheer forces at work in that process. So, I agree that that's a candidate for automation or productivity improvements or things like that. I'm still not convinced that it's in the aggregate shifting things that much, and then you can go through all sorts of individual job descriptions where people used to have secretaries because typing was a skill, and with a word processor you don't quite need this. You can do short emails. You don't quite need a secretary. People still have executive assistants that somehow do slightly different sets of responsibilities, but it's not clear we have fewer executive assistants than we used to have secretaries.

So, when one actually concretizes it, it's not quite clear how disruptive the automation that's happening really is. Again, it's a version of the tech stagnation thing. The last 40, 50 years, things have been slow. We're always told it's about to accelerate like crazy. That may be true. In some ways, I hope that's true, but if one was simply extrapolating from the last 40 to 50 years, perhaps the default is that we should be more worried about the lack of automation than excess automation.

If we had this sort of runaway automation, you could get to 3%, 4% GDP growth, and at 3% to 4% GDP growth, we can solve these problems socially. Then there will be a lot more room for various social programs. I wouldn't want them to be misdirected in all sorts of ways, but there would be a lot of things that we could do. And I would be very uncomfortable starting with the social programs without the growth. That's the sort of conversation that I often see happening in Silicon Valley, where we start with UBI, because we're lying about automation. If automation's happening, then we'll see in the productivity numbers, and then eventually, maybe we need something like UBI. If automation is not happening and you do UBI, then you just blow up the economy. Doing them in parallel, I'm okay with that. I'm not okay with starting with the socialism. Even a Marxist wouldn't believe this. Even a Marxist thinks you have to first get the capitalists to do things before you can redistribute stuff. You can't start with the redistribution before we've done the automation.

The Google propaganda is that we have runaway technological progress, a lot of people will be left behind, and we need to take care of them. This doesn't show up in any of the data. We have 3.5% unemployment, the productivity numbers are still pretty anemic, and it doesn't show up in any of the economic data. So that's sort of the starting point. If you think about automation and the rate of automation, it's been going over for 200, 250 years since the industrial revolution, and my suspicion is the rate has slowed because the things that we were able to automate easily like farming or manufacturing have been automated. And even if we're still automating manufacturing at the rate of 5% a year, it's a much smaller part of the economy, and so the total productivity gains are actually slower. The sectors that are left are sectors that look very much the same as they did 100 years ago, and so it's like kindergarten teachers, nurses, yoga instructors, all these sort of nontradeable service sector jobs are fairly immune to automation. They're a large part of the economy, and that's perhaps why things have slowed. And then we always have this sort of fantastical story that this is about to change, but if you look back over the last 40 years, the simple reason it's slowed is because the sectors that were immune to automation have just become bigger and bigger parts of this economy. And so I think the—I don't know. I tend to think the Silicon Valley/UBI discussion, it's like identity politics. It's like this sort of magic trick. We're drawing your attention away to something else. It's like all the technology is going to take all your jobs, and should we have UBI to take care of you? And what we should be paying attention to is that people in Silicon Valley have not been doing enough. There are a lot of critiques of the big tech companies, of things they've done wrong and different things over the last few years. \[[21](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/events/2019-wriston-lecture-end-computer-age-thiel)]

My cut on why there's such a political pushback against the tech companies in Silicon Valley is they've not innovated enough. It's like if you've done bad things, one of the things you can always say is, "Well, we've done these good things too," and the list of good things is sort of lacking. Probably the biggest one on the Google list is self-driving cars. And I think that would be a significant innovation, on the other hand, they've been promising it for 10 years. They're talking about it less than they were four or five years ago. They expected the time to be expanding. But it's not that big an innovation. And I think going from a horse to a car is bigger than going from a car to a self-driving car. And so we have to quantify this and really think through how much is going on. And these problems are, if anything, even more serious on the science side. And one form of this problem of scale that I talked about is if you're too big a scale, it becomes impossible to actually know the particulars of what is going on. And I think it's maybe a feature of late modernity that things are so specialized. And we have the cancer researchers talking about how great they are, and the quantum computer people say they're about to build a quantum computer. And you've all these narrower and narrower groups of self-policing experts telling us how great they are.

## We’ve seen globalization rather than technological progress
The 19th century was an era of both tremendous globalization and tremendous technological progress from 1815, ending with the start of World War I in 1914, when globalization goes very much in reverse, technology continues at a breakneck pace. I would date 1971 when Kissinger goes to China as the year where globalization begins again in earnest. We have had 40-plus years now of breakneck globalization. But what I’ve argued is relatively more limited progress in technology, mostly centered on this narrow cone of progress around computers, software, Internet, and not so much in many other areas of technology. So the 20th century had a period of technology with less globalization, and then a period, a more recent period, of globalization with more limited technology. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I think in the US there definitely are large elements of our economy that have been linked to this globalization story as well, and if I had to do sort of a long-short version, I would try to be skeptical of the parts that are linked to globalization.

It’s reflected in some ways in the different ways we talk about our worlds. So in 1965, when you had technology but no globalization, you would have described the world geo-politically as the First World and the Third World. The First World was the part that was technologically progressing. The Third World was that part that was sort of permanently screwed up.
Today, the dichotomy would be between the developed and developing worlds, which is a convergence, homogenization, globalization theory of history. The developing world is converging with the developed world and becoming more and more alike. So this is a pro-globalization dichotomy, but at the same time, it’s also an anti-technological dichotomy, because when we say we living in the United States or Western Europe or Japan are living in the so-called developed world, we’re saying implicitly we’re living in that part of the world where nothing new is going to happen. Where things are done, finished, and exhausted.

I feel that’s always a little bit too pessimistic. I think, in theory, we should have both globalization and technology. In practice, we certainly have choices that we make. On an individual level, do we work in ways that are more globalization-oriented, more technology-oriented? It’s possible that over the last 40 years there were so many gains from globalization that it was natural for talented people in our societies to work in those, in industries that were linked to globalization. And perhaps those gains are a little bit more hard to come by now. And maybe it makes sense to rebalance towards technology.

If you think of it geographically within the US, you could say that New York City is the city that was linked to finance, finance is the industry that’s linked to globalization simply because it’s about the global movement of capital. It’s something that’s very easy to move around the world so somehow the economy and future was centered on New York City from, say, 1982 to 2007, that quarter century, was the period when people really believed in globalization.

The sort of strange shift from New York City to Silicon Valley I see is the shift where maybe we can get more out of technology, it’s harder to make progress on globalization. I still spend some time in both New York City and mostly Silicon Valley. It’s always striking the extreme contrast. Optimism in Silicon Valley and the very deep pessimism that I feel always permeates New York, where there’s this model that’s not quite working anymore. That’s why you see New York City – and then I think, remarkably, that’s what people believe in China at this point, which again as a country is geared to this to a degree greater than perhaps anywhere else in the world.

If I was talking to a young person graduating from college, I would discourage them from working at a big-money center bank in New York, or for McKinsey, or the international global consulting firm, which is, again, a classic globalization career. Clinton Global Initiative, that sounds very dated at this point. That’s so 2005. World Economic Forum. All these things have sort of a dated kind of a feel. This is the way the future used to be.

I would bet on globalization slowly being in abeyance. I think with the benefit of hindsight, we will realize that 2007 was not just the peak year of the finance boom, but also the peak year of globalization, like maybe 1913. Happily, it hasn’t resulted in a world war, at least not yet, but I think we are in this period where globalization is steadily pulling back. And so you want to be in places or industries that are levered to things other than globalization. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

There have been periods of globalization and technology in the last two centuries, and they’re not synonymous. The 19th century, I think you had both. You had enormous globalization, enormous amounts of technological process, 1815 to 1914. 1914 World War I starts. Globalization goes into reverse. Trade breaks down. The world becomes sort of much more fragmented. Part of it becomes communist, more or less secedes from the rest of humanity. And technology continued very, very much at a pace. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

By 1971, Kissinger’s trip to China, is the point where I would say globalization starts again very much in earnest. But I think we’ve had, for much of the last 40 years, a somewhat more limited technological process, where the word technology has been narrowed to information technology. In the 50s and 60s, technology meant many other things. It meant biotech, medical devices. It meant nuclear power, new forms of energy, underwater cities, the green revolution in agriculture, space travel, supersonic aviation, flying cars, etc., etc. So there has been—so I would argue that the 19th century had both—the last 100 years had a period of technology without globalization, and then more recently, a period of globalization with somewhat more limited technological progress. A lot in computers and the world of bits. Not so much in the world of atoms.
