---
layout: post
title: "What is happening in different areas of technology?"
date:   2021-07-14
categories: Thiel
---
This is the fourth of a series of posts outlining Peter Thiel's views on progress and stagnation.

## Aerospace
In 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American in space. In 1969, Neil Armstrong became the first person on the moon. We have not been back to the moon since 1972 and with the final Shuttle flight in 2011, the US will be without the ability to send an astronaut into orbit for the first time since it began its manned space program. For an industry that supposedly defines the future, space isn’t doing so well. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

One of the major barriers to making use of space is the sheer cost of getting material into orbit: about $19,000 per kilogram (depending on the orbit), a price that has hardly changed since the 1960s. The elasticity of demand for getting into space at very high price ranges looks basically flat – people who have to go, go (the government, telecommunications providers), and almost no one else chooses to. Were prices to decline, the economic potential of space could be more fully realized. Imagine if it cost you $500 every time you drove to the Apple store. You’d be inclined to replace your computer and phone much less frequently, even though these devices get radically better every year. If there were a vastly cheaper way of getting to Best Buy – or work, the gym, or wherever – you’d consume more of that good. It strikes us then that finding ways to get launch costs down is not only lucrative in its own right, but would vastly increase the size and potential of the space industry, a latter day version of the railroads opening up the West. NASA believes that the commercial market would increase substantially were launch costs reduced by a rough order of magnitude. SpaceX appears to be on track to reduce costs by that order of magnitude, which would make it an enormously valuable company in its own right. If it succeeds, there should at last be plenty to do in space, from telecommunications to power generation to high-precision microgravity fabrication – if investors with cashare ready to fund that innovation. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

Another major area of improvement is overcoming the tyranny of distance. Cheaper, faster transportation has been a major lubricator of trade and wealth creation. For almost two centuries, technology has improved transportation relentlessly. Unfortunately, over the past thirty years, there have been no radical advances in transportation technology (in-flight DVD units are nice, but not revolutionary); take, for example, the travel time across the Atlantic which, for the ﬁrst time since the Industrial Revolution, is getting longer rather than shorter. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

## Biotech
Medicine has been the beneficiary of two radical developments over the past sixty years: the discovery of the structure of DNA in 1952 and the rise of information technologies in the 1960s. One would expect that the discovery of life’s code, combined with the power of computing, would have radically increased the quality and length of human life-spans. But life-spans aren’t getting longer as quickly as they used to, and in some places they’re even getting shorter. Worse, the number of new drugs introduced each year – especially important new drugs (which you can measure by FDA fast-tracking) – is surprisingly low and well below the quarter-century average. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

That’s not to say that biotechnology can’t progress quickly. Less than twenty-five years after Watson and Crick published the structure of DNA, venture capitalist Robert Swanson and biochemist Herbert Boyer founded Genentech, which went on to synthesize insulin far faster and more cheaply than almost anyone believed possible. And in a great revolution in the FDA approval process in the 1980s following pressure from the AIDS lobby, the agency acted almost nimbly to approve a huge number of important new drugs for many maladies. But the revolution in innovation and regulatory efficiency has not been sustained. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

Biotechnology has already created one revolution. It can certainly create another. There are presently three major and related obstacles facing biotechnology (or biotechnology investment at any rate): lack of data, capital intensity, and a medieval approach to therapeutic discovery. The first major problem is that genetic sequencing, which provides us with the body of knowledge we require to create genomic therapies, is extremely slow, expensive, and inaccurate. Present methods of sequencing (which use fluorescence) can only sequence about 95% of larger genomes, take forever to do so, and cost a fortune. The second problem is capital intensity: it simply takes far too much time and money before a company has any real indication that a drug might work with animal/human trials fantastically expensive despite the help of computer modeling. The final problem is an extremely slow drug discovery process: fundamentally, discovery still proceeds by enlightened guesswork, rather than as a disciplined process – and there is no good way for investigators to share data. Biotechnology companies that can overcome these stumbling blocks will create enormous value for their investors and society. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

It’s a tricky thing to measure medical progress . Life-span doesn’t reflect quality of life (surely we would view medicine as more advanced were we to live only 75 excellent years rather than 80 years with 20 of them in misery) and it tends to be over determined by infant mortality (but note that both life-expectancy at birth, and years remaining for those who survive to adulthood, suggest that medical progress is mediocre). \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

The problem that I remain the most passionate about is for us to make some real and continued progress in the fight against aging and death. This is not just about my face as a problem; everybody on this planet faces it. We have about 100,000 people a day who die mostly from diseases linked to old age. And what I always find extraordinary is how little we’re doing about this problem. It seems that people are either in a mode of denial or acceptance, which are, in some ways, opposite extremes. But they both have the effect of stopping you from doing anything if you’re in denial and say this is not a problem, or if you accept it and say there’s nothing you can do about it, both of these are passive modes. \[[18](https://tim.blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/28-peter-thiel.pdf)
And what I think we need is a much more active mode. Instead of being in denial or acceptance, I would like us to be spending a lot more time fighting death. There are people who say that death is natural to which I think the response always has to be that there is nothing more natural for us than to fight death.

## Energy
A lot of these things sound very out there but if you look at things like nuclear technology, we could be building much safer, much cheaper reactors and I think it is probably a combination of political will and a belief that something like this could work that would enable it to work. And if you don’t think it can work, it won’t happen. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

[Bill Kristol: 50 or 60 years ago, people would have assumed, people did assume energy will be cheap and plentiful, it will be virtually like water] Yeah, it’s too cheap to meter.

If you think about the energy density of something, probably the more advanced technologies and ones that produce more energy with less of a unit of volume, and so there’s a sense in which something like nuclear power still seems like the energy of the future versus, say, massively distributed windmills or solar panels are less energy intensive than say oil or natural gas. And in that sense, seem somewhat retrograde.

The correlation between wealth and energy use is extremely high and whichever direction the causality runs, a future world of greater material comfort is going to be one that uses more energy (certainly in the aggregate). Unfortunately, conventional sources of energy are extremely problematic, tangled up with political and environmental costs, and in the case of oil, significant geologic constraints. Alternative sources of energy represent a tremendous opportunity, but as the persistently rising real cost of energy shows, we have made little progress in generating more energy more cheaply. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

A lot of money has poured into clean technologies. Investments that have focused on efficiency improvements have done well as financial matter, but investments in alternative technologies for actually generating energy have not produced particularly good returns. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

We believe that this is because many companies pursue the wrong model – they seek to be almost as good as the default product, rather than (as should be the case generally) so much better than the default that customers will rush to switch. Imagine, if you will, if Amazon.com were somewhat less convenient than going into, and offered similar prices to, a bricks-and-mortar store. Would you use it? Probably not – people only flocked to Amazon when it became substantially better, in selection and convenience, than physical retailers. What we need are companies developing sources of energy that are as good as, or better than, conventional sources at lower prices and at scale. Unfortunately, relatively few companies research such sources, preferring instead incremental improvements on long-established alternative technologies (wind, solar) whose physical limitations mean they cannot satisfy these requirements. But there is no reason to believe that we can’t invent an alternative to alternatives. Rising energy costs can reflect many factors, including the internalization of externalities, but as a general matter, real progress would result in a downward sloping curve even so, either because new sources of energy were cheaper or because they came with fewer externalities, or preferably, both. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

I’m surprised by how much [oil prices] have collapsed [as of 2015]. I would say, they are still higher than they were in 2002, 2003 on the oil side. The jury is still very much out on how well it’s going to work. I think the big question is, what’s the equilibrium price at which fracking is really going to work? \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

Something like $450 billion has gone into the fracking industry in the last four or five years, and there’s a question whether at $50 a barrel oil, can you actually get a positive return on that money?

The striking thing, even as of summer 2014, when oil was still at $100-plus a barrel, was even though you had these two boom stories: you had the Silicon Valley IT story, and you had the fracking, mid-US growth story. The striking thing was always how much smaller the fortunes were that were being made in the fracking industry, which led me to think that somehow, it was not as great an innovation as was happening on the IT side. Or more marginal, harder to get to work. I think if it barely worked at $100, it’ll be very interesting to see how it works at $50.

## Artificial intelligence
The exponential growth of computational power (represented by Moore’s law), storage capacity (Kryder’s law), data transmission (e.g., Butters’ law), and other physical embodiments of computing is familiar. What is equally familiar is the somewhat slower rate of development in the utility of computers – software has gotten more powerful, but the rate of improvement doesn’t seem to be as swift as in hardware, though measuring improvements in software is somewhat impressionistic. Nevertheless, as anyone who has used a Bloomberg or Lexis can attest, the amount of data we collect clearly outstrips our ability to make easy use of it. One way to look at this is to compare increases in computing power (as measured by the density of transistors on a chip) versus the change in productivity. Few technologies have ever improved as quickly and consistently as computer processors and yet the impact of computing in the (admittedly wildly overdetermined) productivity statistics is difficult to detect. This suggests that however fast hardware improves, software might be running behind. We certainly don’t have anything approaching a general artificial intelligence, a lack many futurists 30 years ago would have found rather surprising. Indeed, until fairly recently, it was difficult to find a stable operating system. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

At the least grandiose level, we need analytical software much more powerful and much easier to use than the current state of the art. Most analytical platforms are exceedingly arcane, requiring lengthy experience with that exact platform to acquire mastery, and yet the quality of analysis remains fairly poor. It does society no good to collect huge amounts of data that only a small minority can analyze, and even then only partially. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

Moving up an order of difficulty, robotics represents another area of underachievement. Industrial robots can be very good at what they do (welding car parts, e.g.), but are extremely expensive and of limited versatility. At the highest end, the industry remains over-focused on producing vanity robots with hyper-specific capability – clunky simulacra that play the violin or smile pointlessly – rather than solving more general problems, like locomotion. And few manufacturers are devoted to making commodity-like robots at low price points, which is essential to a genuine robotic revolution. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

True general artificial intelligence represents the highest form of computing. Whether and when a general artificial intelligence arrives is less critical for the near future than whether we are able to create machines that can replicate components of human intelligence – as we are now doing reasonably well with voice recognition and hopefully will be able to do with visual pattern recognition. At a higher level, machine learning also represents another compelling opportunity, with the potential to create everything from more intelligent game AIs to Watson. The development of powerful AIs (even if they aren’t general AIs) would probably be one of the most important and lucrative technological advances in history. \[[1](https://foundersfund.com/the-future/)]

Certainly, one somewhat more basic point I always try to make is that it’s not at all obvious why the question about, let’s say, near-term AI – so not the way futuristic stuff but the next generation or the generation after that – why it should be seen as such an adversarial dynamic. We’re always talking about computers as substitutes for humans, and yet the reality is they are very different. They are – computers are able to do things in this incredible brute force way, humans are sometimes able to do things far more effectively, and yet there are ways in which our minds are probably much simpler than we think. It’s probably wrong to think of a human mind as having hundreds of billions of neurons because that somehow codes for hundreds of billions of things in our mind. You’re a really smart person if you have 20,000 vocabulary words. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

And so I think there is something about computers and humans where they’re deeply different, and I wonder whether the focus on AI has somehow obscured these differences. The mystery in some ways is why have we actually not built AI? And the conventional explanation in Silicon Valley is we haven’t built it because human minds are so complicated, you have hundred of billions of neurons, you’d need a computer with hardware, the kind we haven’t quite developed yet, and it’s just a matter of time, and we’ll get there. But you could make the same argument. You could say this cup here has close to Avogadro’s number of molecules or atoms in it and could never be modeled by a computer, but you don’t actually need to model every atom, you could just model the basic structure. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

In a similar way, if such a reductionist theory of the mind were possible, it could perhaps have already been designed on 1970s- or 1980s-type hardware. I think there are some very mysterious questions like this that have not been fully thought through. My guess is that it’s just possible that there are these really big differences and that there are – and there’s a separate question if you can brute force a simulation of a human mind, and there are probably ways you could do it, and there are some limits to that, but they’re naturally complementary because they’re so different. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

We normally need to be afraid of people who are just like us because those are the people we’re competing against. If you’re – globalization is scary because it means that you have very underpaid people who aren’t that different from us in other countries competing with people in the US and Western Europe. The computers are not – they’re complementary – they’re not really competing. They would be scary if we had a super-futuristic version where we had a robot that looked just like you, Bill Kristol, and we didn’t have to pay it any money in any context, and you’d be rightly alarmed by that. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

This is the common-sense intuition why people are scared of cloning, there’s a sort of bioethics cut on cloning, but the common-sense reason is that if you had 100 clones of yourself, they’d be competing with you, and you’re always competing with people who are like you, and so to the extent that computers are really different, that’s, I think, much more of a positive than a negative. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I think the hybrid approach is very under-explored in general because we think of computers as substitutes for human beings. In reality, I think they are fundamentally complementary. Computers are good at very different things from what people are good. And the dominant narratives in our society on the computer age are either Luddite or sort of utopian in a negative way where we have to stop the computers from replacing us or the computers will replace us, and that’s a good thing. Whereas, I think this sort of complementarity is probably the much greater reality. It’s conceivable that you could build a computer that would be smarter than a human being in every respect. But I think that’s still somewhere between science fiction and science fiction fantasy.

Yes, my view is that [the brain is] mysteriously simple, and it seems to be able to do very powerful things with relatively few components. Maybe there is some relatively simple algorithm that could replicate it, but it’s strange that we haven’t found that. But it’s perhaps not a problem of hardware, which is the naive standard view that we just need more hardware, and you’ll get it to work. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

The more hopeful view that I still have is that it is likely to be just a continuation of what’s been happening since the Industrial Revolution where mechanization, automation free people up from certain kinds of repetitive tasks and free people up to do other things. It can be scary if we’re living in a society where there are not other opportunities, where there’s not enough growth, where there are problems like that. But in and of itself freeing people up from the drudgery of repetitive tasks is probably a good thing. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

Perhaps if we didn’t want Chinese manufacturing to become as powerful, we needed to automate the assembly lines even faster than we did in the US. If anything, we didn’t mechanize quickly enough in some of these industries. I would say that the sense of nostalgia that we have is a sense that there is a lot that we’re losing. The dilemma is that the things that we’re losing are very obvious. On the other end of the tunnel, there are many things that we will gain. We have every reason to think the things we will gain are much greater than the things we are losing. It’s sort of obvious what we’re losing, it’s not at all obvious what we’re going to gain on the other end. I think that would have been certainly true of the early 19th century when we were in the throes of the first Industrial Revolution. There are certainly aspects of it that are like that today. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

If you’ve got self-driving cars, that would be a significant innovation which would change a decent amount at the margins. There’s some regulatory challenges with it, but it’s right at the intersection of the kinds of things that could happen. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

I think the most natural hope is that information technology starts to broaden out and starts to impact this world of atoms. Then we’re going to have this question about whether the technology outpaces the politics or vice versa.

[Why is AI communist?] In practice, the main AI applications that people seem to talk about are using large data to monitor people, know more about people than they know about themselves. And in the limit case, maybe it can solve a lot of the Austrian Economics type problems where you can know enough about people that you know more about them than they know about themselves, and you can enable communism to work, maybe not so much as an economic theory, but at least as a political theory. So it is definitely a Leninist thing. And then, it is literally communist because China loves AI; it hates crypto. And so that, I think, tells you something. And then I think there's a commonsense level on which people are creeped out about it and this is why. And we should label it accurately. \[[21](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/events/2019-wriston-lecture-end-computer-age-thiel)]

It's hard to judge but my sense is they're quite good at getting data and they're quite bad at finding any meaning or knowing what to do with it. I suspect that the bureaucratic momentum has pushed towards more and more data because, perversely, if you don't know what to do with the data, the tendency is to just get more and more, even though that never actually solves the core problem. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

I think "big data" is one of these buzzwords that when you hear it, you should almost always think "fraud," because the problem is actually to find meaning within data. It's to make big data small. That's actually the core challenge. It's not to collect more and more data.