---
layout: post
title: "What should we do?"
date:   2021-07-14
categories: Thiel
---
This is the third of a series of posts outlining Peter Thiel's views on progress and stagnation.

## Seize the opportunity to change people’s attitudes
The dominant narrative is probably fraying and has been fraying for some time, but it is something like we're in a world of generally fast scientific and technological progress. Things are getting better all the time. There's some imbalances that maybe need to be smoothed out. There's some corner case problems. Maybe there's some dystopian risks, because the technology is so fast and so scary that it might be destructive. But it's a generally accelerationist story. And then there's some micro-adjustments within that, that one would have to make. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

There are all sorts of ways that I think it's fraying. I think 2008 was a big watershed moment, but that still what's largely been holding together. And then there's different institutions. You can look at the universities where there's a tracked thing. It's costing more every year, but it's still worth it. It's still an investment in the future. And this was probably already questionable in the 1980s, 1990s. College debt in the United States in 2000 was $300 billion. Now it's around in $1.6 trillion, $1.7 trillion. And so there's a way in which the story was shaky 20 years ago and today is much shakier. It's still sort of holding together somehow.

Now again, I think people are hesitant to actually articulate it quite that way, because that already sounds not quite true to them. Maybe it's a bright future, but it's really different from the parents, because we can't quite know. And they have all these new devices. They have an iPhone and they can text really fast on the iPhone. We can't even understand what the younger generation is doing. So maybe it's better on ... But "better" has an objective scale. Maybe it's just different and unmeasurable, but better in an unmeasurable way.

So there are ways it's gotten modified but, that would still be a very powerfully intact narrative. And then that there are straight forward things we can be doing. The system's basically working, and it's basically going to continue to work. And there’s a global version of this. There's a US version. There's an upper middle class US version. There's a lot of different variations on this.

I don’t think we’ve lost it all together. It’s always, there’s always, there is – and there’s always a way in which the post-2008 malaise, the silver lining to this is that there is a sense that we need to do new things. We can’t just keep going the ways things were. There is a complacency that we had 10 years ago that you no longer quite can have today. People are far more open to this idea that perhaps there’s been not as much technical progress. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I wrote about it first in 2011, I started talking about it three or four years earlier. Certainly, even in 2011, people thought this was very crazy. At this point even in Silicon Valley, there are people who said, “I thought about it some more, and I think there is actually, there is a lot to this.” There’s more of an openness to this notion, and maybe that’s the first step in getting out of it. You have to realize that we’ve been wandering in a desert for 40 or more years now and not in an enchanted forest, and that’s how we find the first step to get out of it.

I’m not involved in any sort of political- I haven’t run for public office or I don’t intend to run for public office. And so I don’t know exactly how you convey this rhetorically. I do worry that a pro-big progress political message resonates very strangely. So when Gingrich says we should go back to the moon, it’s like well, you’re really lost in space or something – something like that. And so I don’t know if you pushed for building hundreds of new nuclear power plants whether that would – how well that sort of thing would go over. But I do think that the sort of pessimism that is endemic to places like Japan or Western Europe is somewhat un-American. And so there is – there is – and so it is really critical, there still is always an opening to tell a more optimistic story and that we could be doing a lot better than we are. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There is a sense in which the tracked narratives feel exhausted. And that’s why I think there is an opening today in a way in which there was not say in 2007 or 2006. If there’s a silver lining to the crisis of 2008 and post-2008, it is at least a sense that the automatic-track things no longer work as well. And so for a number of decades, there were all these reasonably well-paying jobs people could get that would involve taking little risk, would be sort of incremental and you could become a lawyer, or a banker, or a consultant.

And I think there is some sense that that is no longer working. I think Silicon Valley, even though it’s in some ways an exception to this, is much more charismatic. And so I’d be very bullish on Silicon Valley and relatively bearish on New York City, as sort of a tale of two cities where New York was the tracked thing to do in an overly financialized world. And I think at this point, if you have a talented young person in the U.S., Silicon Valley is probably the most charismatic place for that now.

The hope is that the information technology revolution can somehow be expanded more to the world of atoms than it has. But I do think there’s some sense that these set ways of doing things are no longer working as well. So there’s that negative sense. It often doesn’t quite translate into positive yet where people don’t know what to do instead.

I don’t quite know what it would change, what it would require, to change the sort of malaise. But I do think that a world in which little changes and there’s little progress represents a radical departure from the past. And it is something we should fight really hard in all ways that we possibly can.

I don't think [this narrative] is ultimately stable. So I think ultimately our account is going to prevail. The institutional account is so incorrect that it will ultimately fail. I've probably been more hopeful about how quickly truth prevails than than it has. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

I would still be very hopeful that our account is really going to break through in the next few years. I've been talking about this, the tech stagnation problem for the better part of a decade. And I think when I was talking about this in 2008, 2009, 2010 this was still a fringy view. It was very fringy within Silicon Valley. And I think even within Silicon Valley, there's a lot of people who've come around to it, who've partially come around to it. There's a sense that tech has a bad conscience. It feels like it's not delivering the promises. Google had this propaganda about the future and it's now seen as .... The self-driving cars are further away than people expected. And so I think there is a sense that things have shifted a lot over the last decade.

it's striking how fast it's happened. It's striking how much it's happened in the context of a bull market. So if you describe this in terms of psychology, you'd think that people to be as angry in Silicon Valley as they are today, the stock market must be down 40% or 50%. It's like people in New York city were angry. In 2009, they were angry at the banks. They hated themselves. But the stock market was down 50%, 60%, the banks had gotten obliterated. And that sort of makes sense psychologically. And the strange thing is that in terms of the macro economic indicators, the stock markets, the valuations of the larger companies, it's way beyond the .com peaks of 2000, in all in all sorts of ways. But the mood is not like late '99, early 2000. It has this very different mood.

And the way I would explain this is that, for the people involved, it is sort of a look ahead function. Yes, this is where things are, but are they going to be worth a lot more in five years, 10 years? And that's gotten a lot harder to tell.

And so there's been growth, but people are unhappy and frustrated because they don't see that much growth going forward, even within tech. Even within this world of bits, which had been very, very decoupled for such a long time.

I think there's been the potential to get back to the future for a long time. And there have been breaks in this Truman Show at various points. There was a big break with 9/11. There was a big break with the 2008 crash. You could say some sort of break with Brexit and Trump. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

And the last few years, it's still a little bit undecided what that all means. But I think there were a lot of reasons to question this and reassess this for some time. The reassessments never quite happened, but I would say I think we're now at the point where this is really gonna happen in the next two years to five years to decade. I don't think the Truman Show can keep going that much longer.

We had an offsite when I was running PayPal in spring of 2001. The NASDAQ had gone from 2,000 to 5,000 back to 2,000, the .com bubble was over. And I was explaining, we were just battening down the hatches. At least one little company has survived, and we're going to survive. But the sort of insanity that we saw in the .com years will never come back in the lifetimes of the people here, because psychologically, you can't go that crazy again while you're still alive.

And I keep thinking that we are at some point where the distractions aren't going to work as well. I think the big distraction on the left over the last 40, 50 years have been forms of identity politics where we don't look at the country as a whole. We look at parts of it and it's sort of been a way of obscuring these questions of stagnation. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

I would say the right, the right wing distraction technique has been, I would say something like American exceptionalism, which is this doctrine that the US is this singular exceptional country. It's so, so terrific, so wonderful. It does everything so incredibly well that you shouldn't ask any difficult questions, any questions at all. I think it, in theological or epistemological terms, you can compare it to the radical monotheism of the God of the Old Testament where it means that God is so radically unique that you can't know anything about him. You can't talk about God's attributes, you can't say anything about him whatsoever. And if the United States is radically exceptional, then in a similar way you can say nothing about it whatsoever. And there may be all these things on the ground that seem crazy, where we have people who are exceptionally overweight. We have subway systems that are exceptionally expensive to build. We have universities that are exceptionally sociopathic. I mean, you don't have the student debt problem in any other country. We have trade regime that's exceptionally bad for our country, like no other country is as self destructive as this. There are all these things that we somehow don't ask. So I think exceptionalism somehow led to this country that was exceptionally un-self aware. Greatness is adjacent to exceptionalism, but it's actually still quite different because many countries can be great and great is more a scale. And there's something you measure it against, whereas exceptional, it's just completely incommensurate with anything else. And I think that's gotten us into a very, very bad cul de sac. And I think that there's a way in which that sort of exceptionalism has ended on the right. And there's been, we've moved beyond that. And I'm hopeful that in a similar way, the left will move beyond identity politics even though, right now it feels like the monster is flopping about more violently than ever, even though I think it might be its death throes, but maybe not.

## Quantify the problem
The first and the hardest step is to see that we now find ourselves in a desert, and not in an enchanted forest. \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

One of the things that I would want to quantify more is in the world of science, we can quantify things to an incredible degree of Avogadro's number, the fine-structure constant in physics, all these things are precise to many significant figures. But the question about the rate of progress of science, of innovation, is incredibly unquantified, and it's just hand-waving, and if you have sort of this Panglossian hand-waving where everything's exceptional and we're accelerating at the fastest pace possible, and it's not measurable. My suspicion is that these are the ever-narrower communities of sub-experts, the string theorists, the cancer researchers, telling us how great the string theorists and the cancer researchers respectively are. It's a place where there's no outside check, no reality check, no ability to really keep score, and you are certainly not exceptional and you're not even great. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

The direct scientific questions, I think, are very hard to get a handle on. And the reason for this is that in late modernity, which we are living in, there's simply too much knowledge for any individual human to understand all of it. And so in this world of extreme hyper specialization, where it's narrower and narrower subsets of experts policing themselves and talking about how great they are, the string theorists talking about how great string theory is, the cancer researchers talking about how they're just about to cure cancer, the quantum computer researchers are just about to build a quantum computer, there'll be a massive breakthrough. And then if you were to say that all these fields, not much is happening, people just don't have the authority for this. And this is somehow a very different feel for science or knowledge than you would've had in 1800 or even in 1900. In 1800, Goethe could still understand just about everything. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

1900, Hilbert could still understand just about all of mathematics and so this sort of specialization, I think, has made it a much harder question to get a handle on. The political cut I have on the specialization is always that if you analyze the politics of science, the specializations should make you suspicious, because if it's gotten harder to evaluate what's going on, then it's presumably gotten easier for people to lie and to exaggerate, and then one should be a little bit suspicious. And that's my starting bias.

In the 19th century, pre-Austrian classical economics, the thought was you could still measure things objectively. How many pounds of steel is this factory producing? How many tons of steel is this factory producing? How many cars per hour are the workers producing in this assembly line? There was that intuition about objective value. And there’s been this shift towards making things more subjective when it all becomes sort of unmeasurable or there are too many variables to measure. I think that in some ways was started by Austrian economics, and I think by now at this point it really permeates all of it. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I think the shift towards a subjective ways of measuring economics, it then ultimately leads to this way in which we can’t even coherently talk about progress. Are we actually progressing as a society? And then the answer becomes it’s just impossible to know. It’s just different, all these things are somewhat different, and maybe you’re living in a much smaller apartment in New York City than your parents or grandparents lived, but you have an iPhone with a really smooth flat surface so some kind of hedonic benefit from that. How do you trade that off versus the apartment that’s a quarter of the size of that of your grandparents?

And so I think it’s hard to know how to think about these things, but I do worry that the stress on the subjective, hedonic economic measures are excuses we’re telling ourselves to hide the stagnation or decline from ourselves.

It's mysterious to me how long [stories about continual growth] worked. We had these crazy bubble economies in the ... We had the tech bubble in the 90s, the housing bubble in the 2000s, what I think is a government debt bubble this last decade. And so if you've had this sort of up-down bubble, that's harder to see than if things were just flat. So if the growth in 1970, things had just flat-lined, and you had 40 years of no growth, that would have been problematic. And you might have noticed that very quickly. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

But in a sense, simplifying a lot, you could say the 70s were down, the 80s were up, the 90s were up, the 2000s were down. So two down, two up, net flat, but it didn't feel that way internally.

There was a lot of excitement, a lot of stuff happened. And California was like a even more extreme version of this. The last know the last three recessions in California were much more severe than in the country, as a whole. The recoveries were steeper, and so California has felt incredibly volatile. The volatility gets interpreted as dynamism. And then before you know it, 30 or 40 years have passed.

I think the individual incentives were very different from the collective incentive. The collective incentives, in which we have an honest conversation and level set things and get back to a better place. I think the individual incentives were often, you pretend that it's working great for you. The 20,000 people a year who move to Los Angeles to become movie stars, about 20 of them make it. And so you could say, "Well, it's been really hard. Nobody wants to hire me. This is a terrible city." Or you could say, "You know, this has been wonderful, and that all the doors are being opened to me." And the second one is more fictional. But that's the thing you're supposed to say if you're succeeding. And I think there's a way this is how we've been talking about globalization, a weird sort of a glib globalization. It's working great for me, and I'd like to have more people, more talented people come to the US. I'm not scared of competing with them. And on and on. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

Or academia. If you're a professor in academia, the tenure system is great. It's just picking the most talented people. I don't think it's that hard at all. It's completely meritocratic. And if you don't say those things, well we know you're not the person to get tenure.

So I think there’s this individual incentive where if you pretend the system is working, you're simultaneously signaling that you're one of the few people who should succeed in it.

If you go back 20 or 25 years, I wish I would have known that there was no need to wait. I went to college. I went to law school. I worked in law and banking though not for terribly long. But not until I really started PayPal did I fully realize that you don’t have to wait to start something. So if you’re planning to do something with your life, if you have a 10 year plan of how to get there, you should ask: why can’t you do this in 6 months? Sometimes, you have to actually go through the complex, 10-year trajectory. But it’s at least worth asking whether that’s the story you’re telling yourself or whether that’s the reality. \[[18](https://tim.blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/28-peter-thiel.pdf)
## Be more ambitious and agentic
The future of technology is not predetermined, and we must resist the temptation of technological utopianism — the notion that technology has a momentum or will of its own, that it will guarantee a more free future, and therefore that we can ignore the terrible arc of the political in our world. \[[8](https://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian)]

A better metaphor is that we are in a deadly race between politics and technology. The future will be much better or much worse, but the question of the future remains very open indeed. We do not know exactly how close this race is, but I suspect that it may be very close, even down to the wire. Unlike the world of politics, in the world of technology the choices of individuals may still be paramount. The fate of our world may depend on the effort of a single person who builds or propagates the machinery of freedom that makes the world safe for capitalism.

I also think there’s been this history of success where over time you’ve attracted very talented people who believe they can do things. And one shouldn’t understate how much that sort of belief is effectual. One of my friends was – years ago was looking to join a big bio-tech company, and the pitch to PhDs coming out of graduate school was that we have a better softball team than the other biotech companies. Whether or not you discover something is so random, so unpredictable, that the only thing we can control about your work environment is to tell you that you’re going to have a better softball team, that’s why you should join our firm. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

There's something around a lot of these areas where it felt that people were too much of a small cog in a giant machine, very hard to actually impact things, and there was less of a sense of human agency. That’s where we always have to come back. How do we come back to a real sense of agency?

I think always extreme optimism, extreme pessimism, are both equally wrong. As a libertarian, we should always, libertarians, we should always come back to the question of individual agency and it's not these large historic forces. And there are libertarian, or pseudo-libertarian, narratives in which there were these large historic forces and we'd definitively won these battles but that's not even true to the spirit of free markets or belief in individuals. There's always room for history, there's always room for new ideas, and these things are never definitively decided one way or the other. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

I do think that a world in which little changes and there’s little progress represents a radical departure from the past. And it is something we should fight really hard in all ways that we possibly can. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There’s nothing automatic about history. History is made up by the choices people make and it’s in our hands to decide. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

I don’t think the future is this fixed thing that just exists. I don’t think there’s something automatic about the great stagnation ending or not ending. I think — I always believe in human agency and so I think it matters a great deal whether people end it or not. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

There was this sort of hyperoptimistic book by Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near; we had all these accelerating charts. I also disagree with that, not just because I’m more pessimistic, but I disagree with the vision of the future where all you have to do is sit back, eat popcorn, and watch the movie of the future unfold.

I think the future is open to us to decide what to do. If you take a nap, if you encourage everybody else to take a nap, then the great stagnation is never going to end.

The future is something that has to be thought of in relatively concrete terms and it has to be different from the present. And only something that’s different from the present and very concrete can have any sort of charismatic force. \[[13](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-straussian-moment)]

Think a lot harder about the future...try to think concretely what you want to do...there's always a question, where is the frontier, where are some pockets of innovation where you can do some new things and not be in a crazed competition.

Scientific, technological progress, in a way, the hope is it can lead towards a more cornucopian world in which there's less Malthusian struggle, less violence, and then at the very same time, an honest account of the history of these things is that a lot of it was used to develop more advanced weapons. It was in the pursuit of violence. One account of the tech stagnation, the scientific tech stagnation, is that the breakthrough thing was the atom bomb and then you built the rockets to deliver the bombs more quickly. By 1970 we had enough bombs and rockets to destroy the world 10 or 20 times over or whatever, and the whole thing made no more sense. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

If one of the big drivers of scientific and technological progress was actually just the military dimension, when that became absurd did the whole thing slow down to the space age? Not in 1972 when Apollo left the moon, but was the key moment 1975 when you had the Apollo Soyuz docking? If we're just going to be friends with the Russians, does it really make sense for people to be working 80 hours, 100 hours a week around the clock? And again, I don't think it's all that, but I think one of the challenges, that we should not understate how big it is in resetting science and technology in the 21st century is, how do we tell a story that motivates sacrifice, incredibly hard work, deferred gratification for the future, that's not intrinsically violent? It was combined with that in all these powerful ways.

I think a lot of meaning comes from a counterfactual sense that if we weren't working on something, this problem would not get solved. That's why I always differentiate between mission-oriented companies and social entrepreneurship. They both have a sense of doing something that transcends making money, but mission-oriented companies are often defined by a unique mission that maybe others don’t think is important, whereas a lot of the social entrepreneurship efforts gravitate towards things where you have many copycats doing relatively similar things. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

Silicon Valley is very competitive with Wall Street banks. And there's a way in which the day-to-day jobs are similar: people sit in front of computers, the people went to similar colleges and universities, even the office floor-planning is kind of similar. There are more similarities than one might think. But the narrative at Google is much, much better than at Goldman. That's why they're beating a place like Goldman incredibly in this talent war.

One of the ideas I'm very skeptical of is that people learn from failure. I think, in practice, failure's really demotivating. Hopefully, you have the character to persevere and keep going, but I think the default is that failure is powerfully demotivating. But success is very motivating. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

I'm not trying to get more people to be entrepreneurs. I would like people to start more good companies and fewer bad companies. I think that's the thing. I don’t think starting companies or starting startups is an end in itself. I was talking to one of my friends a few years ago. I asked him "What do you want to be doing five or 10 years?" And he said he wanted to be an entrepreneur. It's a terrible answer.

## Focus on stagnation over other problems
I do think there are always different things that are going on. There is acceleration in some places. There’s stagnation. There’s increasing inequality. You have different themes, but in a lot of these debates, I would say 70 percent is probably stagnation, and if we focus too much on inequality or acceleration, we’re going to get a lot of the public policy debates wrong. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

If you focus too much on acceleration – as Professor McAfee at MIT, The Second Machine Age – it’s runaway technological progress, and then it’s going to lead to more inequality, and so you need to deal – it’s both this really good thing, and it has some problems, and then that pushes you in a certain set of policy directions of what to do. Or the even more optimistic ones are things like, things like Ray Kurzweil with “The Singularity is Near.” This accelerating future and all you need to do is sit back in your chair, eat some popcorn, and watch the movie of the future unfold. And then the kinds of policy debates that we end in this accelerating world tend to be, I find, incredibly ethically charged where it always ends up being good-versus-evil technology.

The technology’s so overpowering that the main risks are it’s going to destroy us all. So you have utopian forms and dystopian forms, and nothing in between. You have the worries in Silicon Valley about AI, or do you really want to live forever or is that just ethically bad? Whereas on the stagnation side, the antonym to good is not evil, the antonym is bad. The problem from my perspective is not so much that we have evil technologies that are going to destroy the world, but that we have a lot of bad technologies and bad science that simply doesn’t work.

Evil has more this ethical thing, and bad has more the sense of not working. There’s an ethical, moral version of it, it’s that people are lying about the science, they’re lying about the technology, and they’re saying that it’s really incredible when it’s often not quite living up to what it is. I find myself much more in this that stagnation is the general dynamic, and it’s reflected in the economic data where median wages have been stagnant for 40-plus years, the younger generation has reduced expectations from their parents, this very broad social, cultural indicators that suggest that things feel, they feel kind of stuck. You have a very different set of questions, what do you do about it? What’s gone wrong? How do we get out of it?

My sense is always that it’s basically that the issue is not inequality, the issue is much more stagnation. There’s a sense of people’s living standards are generally not improving that much, and then, what can you do about that? What are the microsolutions for that? In Silicon Valley, San Francisco, where I live, I would say the single biggest variable that makes people feel the stagnation is the sense in which housing costs, rental costs, are through the roof. The political fix I would be tempted to pursue would be trying to find a way to break the unholy alliance between urban slumlords and pseudo-environmentalists that prevent any new urban development. But I think it’s always much more a problem of stagnation than inequality.

I'm not convinced that power laws are equally true in all fields of activity. The United States was a frontier country in the 19th century, and most people were farmers, and presumably some people were better farmers than others, but everyone started with 140 acres of land, and there was this wide open frontier. Even if you had some parts of the society that had more of a power law dynamic, there was a large part that didn't. And that was what, I think, gave it a certain amount of health. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

And yeah, the challenge is if we've geared our society saying that all that matters is education, and PhDs, and academic research, and that this has this crazy power law dynamic, then you're just going to have a society in which there are lots of people playing video games in basements or something like that.

So, that's that's the way I would frame it. But yeah, I think there definitely are some areas where this is the case. And then we just need more growth for the whole society. If you have growth, you'll have a rising tide that lifts all boats. So the stagnation is the problem.

Look, I don't know how you solve the social problem if everybody has to be a mathematician or a concert pianist. I want a society in which we have great mathematicians and great concert pianists. That seems that that would be a very healthy society. It's very unhealthy if every parent thinks their child has to be a mathematician or a concert pianist, and that's the kind of society we unfortunately have.

A lot of people deny that there's a tech science stagnation going on, but then one of the other things one hears is, "Well, maybe it's not progressing as fast, but do we really want it to progress as fast? Isn't it dangerous? We're just going to build the AI that's going to kill everybody or it'll be biological weapons or it's going to be runaway nanotechnology." I don't think we should dismiss those fears completely. [17]    

I think in general it's just that somehow you will lose control over the violence. You think you can control it. Maybe it's a large state. Maybe it's autonomous AI weapons, which in theory are controlled by state, but in practice, not quite. There's all these scenarios where the stuff can spiral out of control. I'm more scared of the one where nothing happens. I'm more scared of the stagnation world I feel ultimately goes straight to apocalypse. I'm much more scared of that, but we have to understand why people are scared of the nonstagnant world.

[I'm] far more worried about the lack of good technologies than the danger of evil. I feel as a venture capitalist, I see all these bad technologies, bad science where it’s things that just don’t work. The cool-sounding things. The general problem is not that they’re ethically problematic, it’s that they just don’t work. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I'm not a techno-utopian. I don't think technology is automatically good. There are definitely technologies that I think could be developed that I wouldn't like. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

## Improve governments and politics
Can our government restart the stalled innovation engine? The state can successfully push science; there is no sense denying it. The Manhattan Project and the Apollo program remind us of this possibility. Free markets may not fund as much basic research as needed. On the day after Hiroshima, the New York Times could with some reason pontificate about the superiority of centralized planning in matters scientific: “End result: An invention [the nuclear bomb] was given to the world in three years which it would have taken perhaps half a century to develop if we had to rely on prima donna research scientists who work alone.” \[[7](https://www.nationalreview.com/2011/10/end-future-peter-thiel/)]

[Bill Kristol: Would you need a political jolt do you think, or could it be done by private citizens in terms of founding businesses that do the equivalent of Facebook or PayPal in medicine and space exploration and other such things?]

It varies in all these different areas. I mean, certainly there was some deregulation of the space industry under Bush 43, and it’s probably enabled a private company like SpaceX to gain traction. It’s hard to see how medicine can work without a less onerous FDA. So I do think there are parts where you’re incredibly embedded in this risk-averse political system.

One of the problems is that we know what needs to be done long-term in the U.S. You need a better education system, we need to be focused on competing where we can and working together, create win-win situations. The problem is that, in the short term, there are a lot of quick fixes like steel tariffs, like various protective tariffs and things like that. And I think the short-term benefit versus long-term cost is one of the main [problems], and it’s a political problem in the U.S. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

I think it’s a close call. We’ve seen steel tariffs. We’ve seen reregulation in lots of industries. It is a very close call. It depends on whether you think people are going to think for the long term or the short term. And I think the jury’s out.

It’s not clear how you change it on a cultural, political level. I’m always focused on the very modest start-up version, which doesn’t actually work for everything. Again, it’s a very imperfect solution. You can convince a small number of people to start a new business or to do something new. Convincing a much larger number of people to change things, I think, is a much more challenging problem, and then this gets to all these questions: can you reform government research structures? Can you reform NASA? Can you reform the universities? Can you reform even large corporations that in many ways are not much better than the universities or the governments? Maybe a little bit, but not as much as we often like to think. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I don't think Bernie Sanders is really a socialist - I mean there's no five-year plan, he doesn't actually claim that's he's gonna make the post office or the DMV work better. If he was promising things like this it would just be completely ridiculous. And the way in which socialism works is it's just this thing that's really different, and it's meant in opposition to the zombie institutions in our society. And there is a problem that we don't have a very well-functioning capitalist society. There's a generational problem where it is difficult for young people to acquire capital, and that's the young people that are supporting Bernie Sanders. And the the two simple political things that one should really think about are the runaway student debt in colleges: it was $300 billion in student debt in 2000, it's up to $1.7 trillion today, and if you start your life in debt that can never be discharged in bankruptcy it will be much harder to accumulate capital and you might be less friendly to capitalism. So that is a big problem. And I don't think we should socialize the student debt but we should deal with it in a non-socialist way, we should internalize the costs onto the universities. We should redo the bankruptcy laws, yes, you can discharge the student debt, and when you discharge it, it's the college that gave you a bad education that gets stuck with the bill. This is the non-socialist alternative. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

And then I think the other basic problem of a lack of capital or inequality is that it's very hard for people to get onto the housing ladder. The main way that the people in the middle class in this country accumulate capital is through owning real estate, through owning your house, and if through a series of urban zoning laws and bad planning and impossibility of building things, it has become impossible for people to get onto that, and if you could find ways for people to own more houses you would have much less of the sort of millennial crazed socialism. So I think we should try to understand where it's coming from, we need to try to solve it, but at the end of the day I think it will be pretty weak because it's mainly a critique. It's a critique of bad institutions, and if Sanders becomes serious I think it'll be as scary as Corbyn was in the UK, and obviously we'll be talking about the post office and the DMV and it'll just be ridiculous. He can't get elected.

It’s not at all clear that we’re living in anything resembling a democracy. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

We’re living in a representative republic, but then that’s modified through a judicial system. Of course, that’s been largely superseded by these very unelected agencies of one sort or another, which really drive most of the decision-making.

I think calling our society a democracy, whatever may be good or bad about democracy, is very, very deeply misleading. We’re not a republic. We’re not a constitutional republic. We are actually a state that’s dominated by these very unelected, technocratic agencies. The very difficult political question is, “How can you get an advanced, technological society to function in any way that’s more republican or more democratic at all?”

Not at all sure how that is, but I think the challenge is that a lot of these agencies have become deeply sclerotic, deeply nonfunctioning, even though the alternatives to them, politically, often seem to be even worse. The Federal Reserve — lots of things they do, I don’t like, but then once you get people in Congress involved in dictating Fed policy, that always seems even worse.

I think we should always resist the sort of naive views of politics: that politics are just some sort of mechanistic process where we take a poll and we all get to some syrupy answer that everyone can agree with. And that's that's not what politics is about at all. \[[13](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-straussian-moment)]

I have a much more cynical view of this where I think the redistribution rhetoric, it's mainly not even targeted at the wealthy. It's targeted at the lower-middle class, at the deplorables, or whatever you want to call them, and it's a way to tell them that they will never get ahead, nothing will happen in their life and, and that's actually why a lot of people who are lower-middle class or middle class are viscerally quite strongly opposed to welfare, because it's always an insult to them. It's always heard as an insult. I'm not sure they're wrong to feel that. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

Redistribution from the powerful to the powerless, from the rich to the poor, is like from the powerful to the powerless, and so using power to go after those with power, and that's almost oxymoronic.

It's almost self-contradictory. So, there may be some way to do that. I think most of the time you end up with some fake redistribution, some sort of complicated shell game of one sort or another. I know the causation of the stuff is much, much trickier, but if we look at societies that are somehow further to the left on some scale, the inequality, you have to go really far to the left, and maybe just destroy the whole society, before you really start solving the inequality problem.

California, when I first moved here as a kid in 1977, would have been a centrist state in the US politically, and was broadly middle class. Today, California's the second most democratic state. It's a D plus 30 state. It's a super unequal, and at least on a correlated basis, not causation, but at least on a correlated basis, the further to the left it's gone, the more unequal it's become, and there is something pretty weird about that.

I define technology as doing more with less. In the context of security and privacy, a technological solution is one that gives you more security without sacrificing privacy, or more security and more privacy at the same time. A non-technological solution is one that always involves trade-offs where you can get more security and you'll have less privacy, or more privacy but you'll have less security. I think the alternative to something like Palantir would be a world where we're forced to make very unpleasant tradeoffs. I think that at the end of the day, the libertarians lose the trade-off war. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

Disturbingly California is able to get away with putting quite a significant regulatory burden on its industries, and the two big sectors in California are the tech industry in northern California, the entertainment industry in southern California. They’re both these heavily networked industries. So it’s incredibly valuable to be here, even when the taxes are quite a bit higher. And as a result, I still think we’re a long way off from alternate centers getting set up. And one of the things that was very surprising was that the state was able to dramatically increase marginal tax rates in 2012, and it did not actually lead to any excess whatsoever. People are sort of stuck. And this suggests that even if taxes went up a lot more, we’re stuck in these network-effect-like industries where people can’t leave. I think New York State is much more vulnerable. There’s something about finance, which is much more mobile at this point. So I think New York State, as a political experiment, will collapse well before California does. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

Then I think the part that is dangerous about the California dynamic is that when you have these super networked industries, it’s possible that policy can go incredibly far wrong before anybody notices. And the super disturbing example in the US context would be Detroit and the US car industry, which was again, a very networked industry, it was all around Detroit. You had the suppliers, all these different people. There were incredible scale economies, network effects that came from that. So as it got taxed and regulated more and more, people did not leave. There was no response. Then eventually the whole thing completely collapsed. So the risk in California is not that we have some sort of gradual decline, but that it gets sort of pushed, and then sort of goes over the cliff completely. But I think we’re still a ways away from that.

## Work around governments
I do think there’s a question about where in the private sector can you coordinate things on a big enough scale. Silicon Valley start-ups have been a way to do it, and maybe there’s some class of somewhat larger companies. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

My PayPal colleague Elon Musk started both SpaceX and Tesla, which are extremely charismatic businesses, because it involved somewhat larger-scale complex coordination, getting a lot of different pieces together to work. Not as big as we could do, perhaps, if you had a well-functioning government. But I think that’s not really that realistic.

In 2009, the prospects for a libertarian politics appear grim indeed. Exhibit A is a financial crisis caused by too much debt and leverage, facilitated by a government that insured against all sorts of moral hazards — and we know that the response to this crisis involves way more debt and leverage, and way more government. Those who have argued for free markets have been screaming into a hurricane. The events of recent months shatter any remaining hopes of politically minded libertarians. For those of us who are libertarian in 2009, our education culminates with the knowledge that the broader education of the body politic has become a fool’s errand. \[[8](https://www.cato-unbound.org/2009/04/13/peter-thiel/education-libertarian)]

Indeed, even more pessimistically, the trend has been going the wrong way for a long time. To return to finance, the last economic depression in the United States that did not result in massive government intervention was the collapse of 1920–21. It was sharp but short, and entailed the sort of Schumpeterian “creative destruction” that could lead to a real boom. The decade that followed — the roaring 1920s — was so strong that historians have forgotten the depression that started it. The 1920s were the last decade in American history during which one could be genuinely optimistic about politics. Since 1920, the vast increase in welfare beneficiaries and the extension of the franchise to women — two constituencies that are notoriously tough for libertarians — have rendered the notion of “capitalist democracy” into an oxymoron.

In the face of these realities, one would despair if one limited one’s horizon to the world of politics. I do not despair because I no longer believe that politics encompasses all possible futures of our world. In our time, the great task for libertarians is to find an escape from politics in all its forms — from the totalitarian and fundamentalist catastrophes to the unthinking demos that guides so-called “social democracy.”

The critical question then becomes one of means, of how to escape not via politics but beyond it. Because there are no truly free places left in our world, I suspect that the mode for escape must involve some sort of new and hitherto untried process that leads us to some undiscovered country; and for this reason I have focused my efforts on new technologies that may create a new space for freedom. Let me briefly speak to three such technological frontiers:

Cyberspace. In the late 1990s, the founding vision of PayPal centered on the creation of a new world currency, free from all government control and dilution — the end of monetary sovereignty, as it were. In the 2000s, companies like Facebook create the space for new modes of dissent and new ways to form communities not bounded by historical nation-states. By starting a new Internet business, an entrepreneur may create a new world. The hope of the Internet is that these new worlds will impact and force change on the existing social and political order. The limitation of the Internet is that these new worlds are virtual and that any escape may be more imaginary than real. The open question, which will not be resolved for many years, centers on which of these accounts of the Internet proves true.

Outer space. Because the vast reaches of outer space represent a limitless frontier, they also represent a limitless possibility for escape from world politics. But the final frontier still has a barrier to entry: Rocket technologies have seen only modest advances since the 1960s, so that outer space still remains almost impossibly far away. We must redouble the efforts to commercialize space, but we also must be realistic about the time horizons involved. The libertarian future of classic science fiction, à la Heinlein, will not happen before the second half of the 21st century.

Seasteading. Between cyberspace and outer space lies the possibility of settling the oceans. To my mind, the questions about whether people will live there (answer: enough will) are secondary to the questions about whether seasteading technology is imminent. From my vantage point, the technology involved is more tentative than the Internet, but much more realistic than space travel. We may have reached the stage at which it is economically feasible, or where it soon will be feasible. It is a realistic risk, and for this reason I eagerly support this initiative.

## Fix universities
We’ve had a whole series of bubbles in this country, they’ve been quite destructive. It was a tech bubble in the ‘90s, a housing finance bubble in the last decade, and we have something of a government bubble going on right now. It’s the strangest of all, because the government’s so clearly dysfunctional, and yet we have the idea that it’s going to fix things, that things affiliated with government will do things better. We have a bubble in education. If there’s anything in our society that’s a bubble, it’s education. Costs have quadrupled since 1980: 300% increase after inflation in 1980 for college education. It’s not clear that the quality has gone up at all. And if you measure how many years it takes for people to recoup the debt that they take on in college, it’s actually steadily increasing. Since 2000, it’s actually been better to finish after high school than after college on a relative basis. So college was an increasingly good investment through 2000. Since 2000, there’s been a roughly consistent gap between college and high school education because the debt has kept going up that people amass. It’s still better, but by a lesser degree since 2000. We have an enormous amount of money that’s being spent on education, and basically I think the crazy cultural shift that’s happening is that people who are in the younger generation, Millennials, are getting completely screwed. They’re basically being turned into something like indentured servants, where they have to pay off their college loans. Bush rewrote the bankruptcy laws in 2005 to make it impossible to get out of college debt even if you go personally bankrupt. And so I think there is this very serious issue that education and the debts that are being imposed on people linked to education are turning an entire generation into something close to indentured servants. And that seems to me to be a very bad development. And because they’re not being paid enough - the education has been hyped beyond belief. \[[15](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IzAW18s3Wg)]

I can go on all these critiques of the universities, but basically, the basic problem is if you think of it as an economic good, is it a consumption good, is it an investment good, so is it an investment where you're investing for your future? Is it a four year party? Okay, that hybrid is pretty weird, but I think it's actually a hybrid of an insurance policy that people buy to avoid falling through the big cracks in our society and a tournament, a zero-sum tournament, where the elite universities like Harvard and Stanford are basically a Studio 54 nightclub with a long line and a big velvet rope. And if you were the president of Stanford or of Harvard and if you had some kind of crazed martyr complex where you wanted a mob of students, faculty and alumni to come after you, you should give a speech saying this university is offering a great education and Harvard, it used to just educate the 200 million people who live in the US, today it's educating the eight billion people in the world, and so we should increase the enrollment, not by a factor of 40 but let's say two or three over the next 20 years, and you would just get lynched because you're running a Studio 54 nightclub and you shouldn't forget it. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

If you define technology as doing more with less, education is perhaps the most anti-technological aspect of our society today where you’re getting the same at a higher and higher price. The real costs of higher education since 1980 have gone up about 400 percent, that’s after inflation. And it’s not clear the quality has gone up at all. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

On some level, the universities have found that they can just charge more every year. And I think – and so I think the question is maybe why has there not been more resistance to these price hikes. And I think it again in part goes to this failure of an imagination of an alternate future. And so talented people should all go to the same universities, learn the same things, pursue the same types of careers. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And so if we had an Internet bubble or a housing bubble, we certainly have an education bubble today. Bubbles are characterized by things costing more than they’re worth, they’re characterized by intense psychosocial dynamics. So it’s very hard for people to suggest that you should not go to the best college you can get into, because people don’t know what else to do. So again it’s a failure of imagination of an alternate future. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And it’s also bubbles are also characterized by abstractions away from reality. And so I think the word education itself is this incredible abstract filler. And it’s worth drilling down a lot more on what is going on. And that’s the sort of thing you’re generally not allowed to do. So what is it specifically that you’re learning; so, engineering, is it some rigorous humanities course, or is it just education in the abstract? \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I’ve often suggested you could think of this in economic terms. Is education an investment decision where it’s basically something you invest to get a better paying job; is it a consumption decision where it’s a four-year party? And maybe it’s a combination of a bad investment and bad consumption decision where basically people think they are investing by consuming, which was characteristic of the housing bubble, where you bought an especially large house with a swimming pool and you patted yourself on the back for being an incredibly frugal investor. And so there’s an aspect of that. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

But I’ve come to think that even more than investment or consumption, it’s perhaps better to think of education as understood as an insurance policy where it’s probably not worth as much as people are paying for it, but they’re scared of falling through the cracks in our society. And so as the cracks get bigger, we pay more and more for insurance against it. That’s the way it’s advertised. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And then I think the reality is that it’s the exact opposite of an insurance policy; it is actually this crazy zero-sum tournament in which what really matters is getting into the best schools and then a diploma from a third-tier university is really a dunce hat in disguise. And so there is – so I think at its core, it’s perhaps a zero-sum tournament masquerading as general insurance. And that’s incredibly dissonant. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

## Can it be changed? \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]
Historically, I think the tone has been set by the top universities. They have these enormously rich endowments and they are incredibly resistant to influence from the outside. And so I do think it’s the kind of thing that’s very hard to reform from without.

It is nevertheless, I think, heading towards a crisis of sorts where it simply no longer works for the vast majority of middle-class students who are amassing enormous amounts of debt going to college. And so there is going to be enormous pressure. It’s hard to say exactly what the timing on this is, but I think some of the online alternatives are going to get more traction as these financial pressures start to mount.

One of my friends has characterized the university system as the atheist church, which is sort of a successor to the Catholic Church, it’s sort of universal. And that the university system in 2014, it’s like the Catholic Church circa 1514. There’s less diversity, so you have the Dominicans and Franciscans and all these different orders, whereas the diversity between say the Harvard and Stanford political science department is considerably less. But it is sort you have this priestly class of professors that doesn’t do very much work, people are buying indulgences in the form of amassing enormous debt for the sort of secular salvation that a diploma represents.

And what I think is very similar to the 16th century is that the Reformation will come largely from outside. At some point, maybe there will be some internal need to adapt. But I think the first move will have to come from outside because you have systems that are so far decoupled from what actually makes sense, and the people are so bought into a system that just does not work, that I think you will see enormous resistance from the faculty.

There is an incredible conformity and the questions of how are you training people to think in different ways have really gotten lost sight of. I think it is striking how little of a focus there is on teaching in general. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And there is this subtle point where something goes from a not-great system into an all-out racket – how much sense does it make for professors to really invest in their graduate students and Ph.D. programs when there’s a sense that none of these people will get jobs anymore, anyway? And so I think you are in this zone where it has in many ways become this incredible racket. And it is hard to really know what people inside it think. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There is an egalitarian assumption embedded in education where it’s assumed that everyone is more or less the same. And therefore if you look at how well do people who graduate from Harvard do versus people who just have a high school diploma, let’s say they make twice as much money per year if they graduated from Harvard as with a high school diploma. It’s assumed that this is prima facie evidence of how great the Harvard education is. When I think the reality is much more that it’s a super-selective selection effect. There’s selection, there’s signaling, relatively little value-added learning. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

But because we have this egalitarian mindset, it’s hard to make the argument that it is just this – the selection, rather than value-added learning. The obvious way to illustrate this would be: if the top universities in the U.S. were doing as good a job as they claim, the most natural thing for them to do would be to increase enrollment. So if you have 1,600 people this year going to Harvard and we’re offering a fantastic education that’s making them much better than they otherwise would have been, could you have some structured growth plan where you increased that number to maybe 3,000 over 20 years? Certainly the population of the country is a lot larger, it’s attracting people from all over the world. And so if you’re offering such a great education, what sort of a product is that where you wouldn’t increase the number of people who use it? \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

The only product I can think of where you would limit access as much would be a nightclub, which is again a zero-sum product that’s based on exclusion. And I think that if you went to any of these top universities and you proposed doubling the enrollment, you would get a uniform opposition from the alumni, from the current students, from the faculty, because they would rightly perceive that it would make it less prestigious, even though that goes very much against this egalitarian ethos that everyone’s the same. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I think the rhetoric around education is always that it’s a positive sum-game because there is his naive intuition that if I know something and I teach it to you, we both will know it. And so there’s something about knowledge that’s fundamentally, incredibly positive-sum. And I think it masks the very zero-sum aspect of education. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I went to law school, and if you look at the law schools, there’s this brutal ranking on the U.S. News & World Report scale where the top three, I think, are still very good. So if you go to Harvard, Stanford, or Yale, that’s really good. Then, I think, there’s four after that that are pretty good, and then there’s the numbers eight to 14, where maybe if you’re in the top half of the class. And then probably numbers 15 to 200, it’s very unclear whether it’s a positive value for anybody who goes or the bottom 90 percent of those classes. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

## Can it keep going? \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]
When I’ve looked at this, in the 1980s and 1990s, one saw rapidly escalating costs in education but also increasing inequality in our society. And so it was at least correlated. It was always worth going to the top college because you’d make more money and it would seemingly make up for it.

Post-2000, even though there still is a vast gulf between high school graduates and college graduates, it stopped widening. The costs have kept going up. And so the relative value of a college education has actually been going down since about 2000.

If you were to measure the value of a college education by how many years it takes you to pay off your debt, the number of years was actually going down in the 80s and 90s because the premium was going up even faster than the costs were escalating.

Post-2000, it’s taking longer and longer to pay off the debt, so actually the relative premium has been in decline for 14 years now. And, I think, again, 2008 was a bit of a watershed moment where all the sudden, there were a lot fewer of these tracked positions available. When kids graduate from college and moved back in with their parents, that was not part of the deal the parents had implicitly signed.

Certainly it’s incredibly distorted. It’s one of the things that makes the education bubble different from say the housing or the tech bubble of the last decades is that it is actually very hard to measure what the quality of education is. And so when people say things like you’ll figure it out in 20 years, there’s things you will learn that are intangible that will help you 20 years in the future - a somewhat cynical cut on that might be that, well this is the sort of thing you say if you’re running a scam where you want to have a really long shelf life to it so people won’t notice that they’ve been defrauded for a long time. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

But there is something about the immeasurability of education that’s made the education bubble quite durable, but on the other hand, it probably also means that it’s gotten bigger and bigger in a way that’s extremely distorted. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

I think we are at a point where it’s going to start changing. And our backgrounds are in these elite universities – you went to Harvard, I went to Stanford. I think those are the ones that will be the last to change, and so we may be underestimating how much change is going to be happening in the next five, ten years in this very broad swath of colleges where the cost-benefit calculation is not working in any sense of the word anymore. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There’s a question: how good are the elite institutions even for the people who go there? So one of my friends started at Yale in 2001, the dean welcomed the class by saying, “Congratulations. You’re set for life, you got into Yale.” And this is a 17 year old. This seems slightly off. Like maybe it’s true as long as you absolutely never believe it to be true. But if you actually were to believe that, it’s probably quite toxic. And so I think that the K through 12 tracking to the elite universities sets people up in ways when things don’t quite work out automatically for them afterwards, they’re not that resilient, they’re not that able to recover. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There is an amazing degree to which people’s ambitions get beaten out of them in these top universities. If I look at what people thought my senior year in high school. [They] were very ambitious, had all these ideas of what they were going to do. And if you looked at the same people at college plus five years, nine years later, let’s say, it was amazing how much things had been ratcheted down. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

So I do think there’s something problematic where all the talented people go to these schools, they’re evaluated on the same terms and at the end, a lot of ambitions are beaten out of them. Probably the one that I think is even worse for people than Harvard, in this respect, might be Caltech where you have these brilliant math/physics people and after four years where you’re in the middle of your class, you’re convinced that the most you can do with your life is become a line engineer at Lockheed and maybe you can go into mid-level management 20 years later. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

And so that is characteristic of what I think has happened. And what I think we need to somehow find a way back to is this idea that there’s not just a single track, that there are very different things you can do. The question – what truth do you know that nobody agrees with you on - the career version of this, is what are you really good at that other people aren’t that good at? And that somehow gets discouraged by this incredible homogenization. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

There’s a sense that there are all these people who are ahead of you. So there’s always this sense there’s so many people who are much better than you or just as good as you, so who are you to think that you can do anything different? And obviously when everybody starts to think that, nobody does anything. In fact, it becomes self-fulfilling once again and no one does anything different. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

It is always very important to think through where is there a freedom of action that’s possible and what spheres is there a lot less freedom of action. And probably the academic setting, the thing it gears the most talented students towards is academia itself. And that is probably a place where the sphere of action has gone down as much as anywhere in the last 40 or 50 years. You know, this idea that all Rhodes Scholars had a great future in their past. And it’s because they’re encouraged to then do these super-conventional things, where it turns out a lot of other people are doing basically the same things. And you end up again with this question – why does it matter for you to do it if 20 other people are doing it already? \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

On a somewhat more optimistic note, it is not the case that everything is so exhausted. This is, again, this cultural, natural question – is the set of possibilities really this narrow where there only are these tracked things with a few positions at the end of these tracks that are any good. Or are there really a lot of unexplored paths and hidden paths, that are much more promising, that people should explore? And I think political correctness tells us that everything that’s conventionally known is true, there’s nothing outside that that works. And so that’s how I think it probably intersects with this tracking in a very deep way. \[[5](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-transcript/)]

[Rodrigues: Thiel argued that if we want to retool education to accelerate innovation, we first must decompose "education" into its constituent parts: \[[9](https://yaledailynews.com/blog/2013/04/16/billionaire-investor-predicts-bleak-future-for-innovation/)]
- Education as learning. This is rare. Most people who really care about learning are autodidacts.
- Education as insurance. We invest in education in order to hedge against future uncertainty.
- Education as tournament. In this sense, education is zero-sum. Yale and Stanford create a public good by incubating and transferring knowledge, but if they could suddenly triple the size of their student bodies, they wouldn’t. Prestige is un-scalable. Elite universities are like nightclubs.
- Education as babysitter. This is our dirty little secret. “Education” can be a codeword for “holding pen.”]

While I agree that education is important, a perspective to keep in mind is the U.S is able to do far more with less educated people. So if we compare us to Japan. Japan has an educational system that is second to none and yet [still lower worker productivity] and less product, because people are forced into one particular job for their entire lives, the big company mentality. And we don’t have that in the U.S. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

You can try to be honest and say the expectations are dialed down, or you can continue to say everything's great and it just happens not to be working out for you, but it's working out for people in general. And somehow it's been very hard to have the honest reset. And the incentives have been for the institutions to derange and to lie. There's probably a way the universities could function if they did not grow. You’d be honest, most people in PhD programs don't become professors. Maybe you'd make the PhD programs much shorter. Maybe you'd be much more selective; you'd let fewer people in. There would be some way you could adjust it, and the institutions could still be much healthier than they are today. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

But that's not the path that seemingly was taken. And something like this could have been done in a law firm context. Maybe you still let the same percentage of people become partner, but the partners don't make quite as much money as before, or something like that. So that there would have been ways when one could've gone, but those are generally not the choices that were made.

When I was an undergraduate, you still had some older professors who were polymaths, who knew a lot about a lot of different things. This is, I think, the way one should really think of Watson and Crick, or Feynman, or Teller. They were certainly world-class in their field, but also incredible in a lot of different fields.

And the cultural, or institutional, rule, is no polymaths allowed. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

You can be narrowly specialized, and if you're interested in other things you better keep it to yourself and not tell people, because if you say that you're interested in computer science and also music, or studying the Hebrew Bible, wow, that's just, that must mean you're just not very serious about computer science.

The polymaths would be the people who could connect the dots and say: there's not that much going on in my department, and there's not much going on this department over here, and not that much going on in this department over there. And those people are very, very dangerous.

One of my friends studied physics at Stanford in the late '90s. His advisor was this professor at Stanford, Bob Laughlin, brilliant physics guy. Late '90s he gets a Nobel prize in physics, and he suffers from the supreme delusion that now that he has a Nobel prize he has total academic freedom and he can do anything he wants to. And he decided to direct it at - there are all these areas you probably shouldn't go into, you probably shouldn't question, climate science, there are all these things when one should be careful about - but he went into an area far more dangerous than all of those.

He was convinced that there were all these people in the university who were doing fake science, who were wasting government money on fake research that was not really going anywhere, and he started by investigating other departments - started with the biology department at Stanford university. And you can imagine this ended catastrophically for Professor Laughlin. His graduate students couldn't get PhDs. He no longer got funding. Nobel prize in physics, no protection whatsoever.

[Eric Weinstein: It comes as a shock to all of these people that there is no level you can rise to in the field that allows you to question the assumptions of that field.] Right. You're proving yourself, you're getting your PhD, you're getting your tenured position, and then at some point you would think that you've proven yourself and you can talk about the whole and not just the parts, but you're never allowed to talk about more than the parts.

The person in the university context, or the class of people who are supposed to talk about the whole, I would say, are university presidents, because they are presiding over the whole of the university and they should be able to speak to what the nature of the whole is, what sort of progress the whole is making. What is the health of the progress of the whole? And we certainly do not pick university presidents who think critically about these questions at all.

I think one has to go back quite a long time to even identify any university presidents in the United States who said things that were distinctive, or interesting, or powerful. There was Larry Summers at Harvard a decade and a half ago, and tried to do the most minuscule critiques imaginable, and got crucified. But I don't think of Summers as a particularly revolutionary thinker.

In a healthy system you could have wild dissent and it's not threatening because everyone knows the system is healthy. In an unhealthy system, the dissent becomes much more dangerous. I think that's not that surprising. There's always one riff I have on this is always, if you think of a left wing person as someone who's critical of the structures of our society, there's a sense in which we have almost no left wing professors left.  Left-wing in the sense of, let's say, just being critical of the institutions they're a part of.

And there may be some that are much older, so if you're maybe in your eighties we can pretend to ignore you, or you know, this is just what happens to people in their eighties. But I don't see younger professors in their, let's say, forties, who are deeply critical of the university structure. I think it's just, you can't have that.

If you come back to something as reductionist as the ever escalating student debt, you can think: what is the 1.6 trillion, what does it pay for? And in a sense, it pays for $1.6 trillion worth of lies about how great the system is. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

And so, the more the debt goes, the crazier the system gets, but also the more you have to tell the lies, and these things go together. It's not a stable sequence. At some point this breaks. I would bet on a decade, not a century.

I think there are a lot of different critiques one can have of the universities. I think the debt one is a very simple one. It's always dangerous to be burdened with too much debt. It does limit your freedom of action. And it seems especially pernicious to do this super early in your career.

And so, if out of the gate you owe $100,000, and it's never clear you can get out of that hole, that's going to either demotivate you, or it's going to push you into maybe slightly higher paying, very uncreative professions of the sort that are probably less good at moving our whole society forwards. And so I think the whole thing is extraordinarily pernicious.

I started talking about this back in 2010, 2000, it was already controversial, but younger people all agreed with me. And it's a decade later, it's a lot crazier, we haven't yet completely won, but I think there are more and more people who agree with this. I think at this point the Gen X parents of college students tend to agree, whereas I would say the baby boomer parents, 15 years ago, would not have agreed.

The 2008 crisis was a big watershed in this too, where you could say the tracking debt roughly made sense as long as all the tracked careers worked, and 2008 really blew up, you know, consulting, banking. A number of the more track professions got blown up, and so that was kind of a watershed.

I think a lot of these, it was mostly emergent. We had somewhat cancerous, we don't distinguish real growth from cancerous growth, and then once the cancer metastasizes at a certain size, you somehow try to keep the whole thing going, and it doesn't make that much sense.

One of the reasons, one of the challenges on our side - let's be a little more self critical here - is the question we always are confronted with: well, what is the alternative? How do you actually do something? And it's not obvious what the individual alternatives are. On an individual level, if you get into an elite university, it probably still makes sense to go. It probably doesn't make sense to go to number 100. There is a way it can still work individually even if it does not work for our country as a whole. And so, there are all these challenges in coming up with alternate tracks.

I think in software there's some degree to which people are going to be hired if they're just good at coding, and it's not quite as critical that they have a computer science degree. Can one do this in other careers, other fields? I would tend to think one could. It's been slow to happen.

I would look at the college debt thing very seriously. I would say that it's dischargeable in bankruptcy, and if people go bankrupt then part of the debt has to be paid for by the university that did it. There has to be some sort of local accountability. So, this would be a more right wing answer. The left wing answer is we should socialize the debt in some ways, and the universities should never pay for it, which would be more the Sanders-Warren approach.

[Eric Weinstein: What do you think about the idea of a CED, a college equivalency degree, where you can prove that you have a level of knowledge that would be equivalent, let's say, to a graduating Harvard chemistry major, right? Or a fraction thereof.] Great idea. I love it. I think it's very hard to implement. Again, I think these things are hard to do, but great idea. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

But look, we have all these people who have something like Stockholm syndrome, where if you got a Harvard chemistry degree, and if you suspect that actually the knowledge could be had by a lot of people, and if it's just a set of tests you have to pass, that your degree would be a lot less special, you'll resist this very, very hard.

If you're in an HR department, or in a company hiring people, you will want to hire people who went to a good college because you went to a good college, and if we broaden the hiring and said we're going to hire all sorts of people, maybe that's self-defeating for your own position. So I think one should not underestimate how many people have a form of Stockholm syndrome here.

We had to hack the prestige status thing, where it was as hard, or harder, to get a Thiel fellowship than to get into a top university. And so, that's part that's very hard to scale. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

At the top universities the BA is the far more prestigious degree than the PhD at this point. So, if you're at Stanford or Harvard, it's pretty hard to get into the undergraduate, and then you have more PhD students than you have undergraduates. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

There are all these people who are on a very questionable track. They've made questionable choices. And they probably are going to have some sort of psychological breakdown in their future. Their dating prospects aren't good. There are all these things that are a little bit off.

So yeah, in theory, if you had a super tightly controlled PhD program, that might work, but you have to at least make those two changes. As it is, the people in graduate schools, it's like Tribbles in Star Trek. We have just so many, and they all feel expendable and unneeded, and that's not a good place to be.

And, whereas I think the undergraduate conceit is still that it's more K-selected instead of R-selected, that it's more that everybody is special and valuable. That's often not true either.

So, I'd be critical of both, but if we could have a real PhD that was much harder, and that actually led to an academic position or some other comparable position, that would be good.

What is the teleology of these programs? Where do they go? One of the analogies I've come up with is: I think elite undergraduate education is like junior high school football. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

Playing football in junior high school is probably not damaging for you, but it's not going anywhere because if you keep playing football in high school, and college, and then professionally, that's just bad. And the better you are, the more successful you are, the less well it works.

And then the question is: what's the motivational structure? When I was an undergraduate in the 1980s there was still a part of it where you thought the professors were cool, it might be something you'd like to be at some point in the future, and they were role models, just like in junior high school football an NFL player would have been a role model. And now we think you're just doing lots of brain damage, and it's a track that doesn't work, and therefore the teleology has broken down.

So undergraduate, part of the teleology was that it was preparing you for graduate school, and that part doesn't work, and that's what's gotten deranged. Then graduate school, well, it's preparing you to be a postdoc, and then, well, that's the postdoc apocalypse, or whatever you want to call it, postdocalypse. But just at every step, I think, the teleology of the system is in really bad shape. Of course, this is true of all these institutions with fake growth that are sociopathic or pathological, but at the universities it's striking as very bad.

And I think this was already true in important ways back in the '80s, early '90s, when I was going through the system. And when I think back on it, I think I was most intensely motivated academically in high school, because the teleology was really clear. You were trying to get into a good college. And then, by the time I was at Stanford, it was a little bit less clear, by the time I was at law school, really unclear where that was going. And by the time I was 25 I was far less motivated than at age 18, and I think these dynamics are just more extreme than ever today.

I think the question we have to always ask is how many people should we be training and my intuition is you want the gates to be very tight. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

One of my friends is a professor in the Stanford economics department, and the way he describes it to me is they have about 30 graduate students starting PhDs in economics at Stanford every year. It's six to eight years to get a PhD. At the end of the first year, the faculty has an implicit ranking of the students, where they’ve sort of agreed who the top three or four are. The ranking never changes. The top three or four are able to get a good position in academia, the others not so much. We're pretending to be kind to people and we're actually being cruel.

And so, I think that if there are going to be - you know, it's a supply demand of labor - if there are going to be good positions in academia, where you can have a reasonable life, it's not a monastic vow of poverty that you're taking to be an academic, if we're going to have that, you don't want this sort of Malthusian struggle. If you have 10 graduate students in a chemistry lab, and you have to have a fistfight for a Bunsen burner or a beaker, and if somebody says one politically incorrect thing, you can happily throw everyone, them all out of the overcrowded bus. The bus is still overcrowded with nine people on it. That's what's unhealthy. And so, yes, it would be mistake to say we should dial this down and have zero people in these fields. That's not what I'm advocating, or what was being advocated here, but there is a point where if you just add more and more people in a starvation Malthusian context, that's not healthy.

I do think there is something about basic science that doesn't all have the for-profit character. Some of it has this nonprofit character. We're building up this knowledge base for all of humanity. I don't yet know how we do basic science without some kind of institutional context. That's one that would seem absolutely critical. I'm super interested in the problem of longevity, radical life extension. My disappointment in the nonprofit institutions and nonprofit world has directed me more and more over the years to just invest in biotech companies and try to find these better-functioning corporate solutions. And then I always have this worry in the back of my head that maybe there are these basic research problems that are being sidestepped because they're too hard. So I think basic science is one that you'd have to do, but you have to somehow also reform the institution so that you don't have this Gresham's law where the politicians replace the scientists. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

I don’t like the word education because it is such an extraordinary abstraction. I’m very much in favor of learning. I’m much more skeptical of credentialing or the abstraction called education. So there are all of these granular questions like what is it that we’re learning? Why are you learning it? Are you going to college because it’s a four year party? Is it a consumption decision? Is it an investment decision where you’re investing in your future? Is it insurance? Or is it a tournament where you’re just beating other people? \[[18](https://tim.blog/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/28-peter-thiel.pdf)
And are elite universities really like Studio 54 where it’s like an exclusive nightclub? I think if we move beyond the education bubble that we’re living in today, the future will be one in which people can speak about these things more clearly. And we will talk about is it an investment decision? Is it a tournament? Is it a trade or vocational skill that we’re developing? I think engineering is the opposite of education because it is actually a specific skill that people are learning. And engineering as a discipline cuts the most against the banality that we’re always told that we’re just learning how to learn, or you’re not learning anything in particular. You don’t know why you’re learning things. Engineering is sort of the anti education, in that sense. And I think it is, in some ways, a paradigm for the way I think it will be more in the future. I think we will have much less of a one size fits all approach. I think the big tract institutions are delivering less and less and charging more and more.

And so I think we are at a point where things will look very different. One of my friends suggested that we were at a point in education that’s like the place where the Catholic Church was on the eve of the reformation. It had become a very corrupt institution. It was charging more and more for indulgences. People thought they could only get saved by going to Catholic Church just like people today believe that salvation involves getting a college diploma. And if you don’t get a college diploma that you’re going to go to hell. I think my answer is, in some ways, like that of the formers in the 16th century. It is the same disturbing answer that you’re going to have to figure out your salvation on your own.

This is my candidate for the biggest lie that the Obamas ever told. This is one that's all encompassing, that follows from getting the scale wrong. And they both did it, sort of. I'll let ladies go first; Michelle Obama first. So quote, "The one thing I've been telling my daughters is that I don't want them to choose a name. I don't want them to think, 'Oh, I should go to these top schools.' We live in a country where there are thousands of amazing universities. So the question is, what's going to work for you?" And so at scale, you obscure all the differences. Of course, we know they were lying. The Obamas' daughter ended up going to Harvard. And it's reassuring. I mean, it would be very disturbing if they actually believed that this stuff worked at scale in the way they claim it does. Her husband came up with an even more succinct one, telling two lies at once. Quote: "Just because it's not some name-brand, famous, fancy school, doesn't mean that you're not going to get a great education there." So let's parse that two lies. First off, if it isn't a name-brand, famous, fancy school, you're not going to get a great education. You're just going to get a diploma that's a dunce hat in disguise. If it is a name-brand, famous, fancy school, you probably also won't get an education. \[[21](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/events/2019-wriston-lecture-end-computer-age-thiel)]

And so, if we were to rightsize the scaling for our intellectual life, you should describe Harvard, not as one of the thousands of great universities, you should describe it as a Studio 54 nightclub. It's this tournament. It's probably good for the self-esteem and bad for the morals of the people who go there, and maybe call it a wash. Probably not a criminal thing, doesn't need to be shut down but probably does not deserve a tax deduction.

I'm very focused on the question of what happens at the elite universities because they dominate the whole narrative. A lot of lesser colleges are trying to emulate the top ones in one way or another. And I do think there's something very odd about our talented people all going to the same short list of colleges and then, from there, going into the same narrow list of careers. My view is if you want to actually somehow get people to rethink the system, you have to rethink the very top schools. \[[22](https://www.vox.com/2014/11/14/7213833/peter-thiel-palantir-paypal)]

I think one of the things that's deeply dishonest about it is that it mostly presents itself as an insurance policy, because people in our society are somewhat pessimistic and somewhat worried about the future. They desperately want insurance. But the reality is that it is this tournament.

You could ask—is education an investment where you invest in something in order to increase your earning power. Is it a consumption decision where college is a four-year party. And I originally thought it was like the housing bubble, which was a combination of consumption and investment, where people thought I’m buying a big house with a swimming pool, look at how much money I’m saving, which is a crazy way to think about things. So when you think you’re consuming by investing, that’s sort of like A and not A at the same time. But I think at this point it’s actually a combination of two different things. It’s a combination of an insurance policy people are buying because they’re scared of falling through the big cracks in our society, and then that’s combined with the reality of a zero sum tournament where if you get a diploma from the wrong school, it ends up being a dunce hat in disguise. So we basically have a zero sum tournament that masquerades as an insurance policy, which are of course very different kinds of things. So that gets you at the fundamental fraud. \[[23](https://www.independent.org/events/transcript.asp?id=165)]

## Step up to the challenge of China
There was that very famous Reagan speech that you [Peter Robinson] wrote for Reagan - tear down that wall, Mr. Gorbachev - and it was very effective. But perhaps it was not only in the West that we learned lessons from it. The Chinese communists also paid very careful attention to it, and they learned that you had to have perestroika without glasnost. You had to get rid of the Marxism without getting rid of the Leninism, and they learned somehow the very opposite lessons of that fateful year 1989. Tiananmen worked in China and that is what is continued to work. So I think that's a simple first cut. There is nothing about history that is automatic or predetermined. It's always a question of agency, of people, and unfortunately, China took the lesson very much to heart and has stayed on this trajectory. Its per capita GDP is close to $10,000, which was the point where democracy was supposed to start taking over, and it seems to have, if anything, been going the opposite direction. Or there's another historical riff I have on this that I was thinking about the other day, where there was this famous interview with Zhou Enlai in the early 1970s where they asked him about the French Revolution and what did he think of the French Revolution, and he said it's too early to tell, which was seen as a funny diplomatic answer at the time. But I've come to think that there's a very sinister way of thinking about that answer which is that in some sense, the French Revolution, it ended. It ended in 1794 when the insanity burned itself out and you had Thermidor. And then of course when you had the Russian Revolution, one of the promises Lenin had was that the Russian Revolution, the communist revolution, would never have a Thermidor. But it took a little bit longer than five years as it did in France, but I'd argue you had something like Thermidor, 1956 when Khrushchev gave the anti-Stalin speech, certainly by the time of Gorbachev. China, what Zhou Enlai was saying in that speech was that China is the one country that is still true to the spirit of the French Revolution. It is the one country in the world in which there will never be a Thermidor. And then of course the way this manifests is that it will still continue in the sort of revolutionary communism that will have one genocidal thing after another, and that continues under Xi. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

[Peter Robinson: Will artificial intelligence overturn Hayek and Friedman? Will it enable China to achieve sustained economic growth without economic or political freedom?] \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

Well, let's not be too dogmatic in answering this. I certainly think that it's possible that the totalitarian, the form that totalitarianism has in China will exhaust itself, that it will hit some kind of crisis at some point. China does have some very serious demographic challenges. You could say it's a revealed preference that people don't want to have children because it would be very cruel to allow a child to be born into such a horrible society. So I think there are ways that we can speculate on how it might ultimately exhaust itself. But I think we should not be dogmatic on the other side and assume that it automatically will, and that perhaps it can develop, perhaps it can catch up, you could get things to work. And there are probably certain parts of the economy where you don't need to be that free or that creative or that innovative, there is just copying things that work. Just copying the West. And maybe you can't get quite to our standard of living but maybe you can get to a half of our standard of living or something like that.

I think it's unclear [whether AI is a game-changer], I think there's always a lot of propaganda around all these buzzwords and so I think it's somewhat exaggerated, but yes of course, there's sort a continuation of the computer revolution where you'll have more powerful Leninist controls; maybe the farmers can sell the cabbages in the market and you can still have face recognition software that tracks people at all times and all places, and so there's a hybrid thing that might work for longer than we'd like. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

I'm gonna give you my speculative conspiracy theory on how the Chinese communists are trying to psychologically undermine the West, and I believe they are inducing two perspectives on China in the West. One perspective is that China is very far behind us, that it's still a very poor backward country. Even in 2049, even on the 100-year anniversary, it will still only be a middle-income country, and it's so far behind that we don't need to worry about it and we can be in denial about China. And the other one is that it's so far ahead of us that there is no way that we can ever catch up. It works better, it can build skyscrapers super fast, it works so much better that we have to just accept that we are really far behind. Denial is extreme optimism, acceptance is extreme pessimism, but extreme optimism and extreme pessimism converge to doing nothing. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

For example, I think there was this question about Taiwan and how protected Taiwan was and I believe it was in a single month in the year 2005 where the US strategic assessment shifted from Taiwan would be safe for decades because of our aircraft carriers and whatnot, to no, Taiwan was already lost because China had all these missiles that they could knock all our defenses out overnight. And so it's somehow, so the fact that it gets framed in these two extreme terms, I'm wondering if you're a mouthpiece of the Chinese communist party and it's always extreme acceptance and extreme denial, and the reality is actually, no, it's close, and there are strengths the US has and there's strengths they have and it's a fight, and it's gonna be a fight for a very long time. And even if China in some ways gains ground in that fight it will be strategically close for a long time because as China gains ground, other countries will get more scared of China and they will work more closely with the US. Japan was toying with the idea of shifting its alliance from the US to China, this was always the DPJ line in Japan in the late '90s, early 2000s. Under Abe, that's definitively over. Japan is back firmly on the side of the US. Vietnam, much more on the US side than the China side. This is very different from Vietnam of 40 years ago. And so even if China gains ground in certain things, I think the strategic picture will stay very even for a really long time. So somehow it's in between is probably the truth and it will be the truth for a long time.

It's China is super weak, and China is super strong. And I've been in meetings in China where in some sense you got both messages within 20 minutes of one another, and it's logically inconsistent but psychologically it doubles up. \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

[Peter Robinson: "The issue of Soviet-American relations is in essence a test "of the overall worth of the United States." To avoid destruction the United States need only "measure up to its own best traditions "and prove itself worthy of preservation as a great nation." Kennan writes that in 1951. If we replace the reference to the Soviet Union with a reference to China would you subscribe to that statement today?] \[[2](https://www.hoover.org/research/peter-thiel-transcript)]

Yes. I don't know, I'm always uncomfortable with saying it's a simple template though. So if we just go with the simple template, it's too automatic, and then if it's too automatic we're back in your Berlin tear down this wall speech, and then we've replaced the reference and we know China's the Soviet Union and because we say it's the Soviet Union we don't need to do anything else because we knew that just all happened on its own. And in practice the Cold War was won in very specific ways. There was a whole series of concrete situations that you had to deal with, and the rivalry with China, it's somewhat different. It's happening in an Information Age, not an Industrial Age. There's a global competition question. There's a way in which the two economies are very deeply connected. We weren't deeply connected to the Soviet Union. So there are a lot of things about it that are very different and I think, yeah, we have to, it's not like 2020 is like 1951, or like 1989. 2020 is like 2020 which is much less helpful but much more accurate.

I think we often have this with these booms or bubbles where on the surface it’s extreme optimism. In the 90s, we had extreme optimism about the new economy in the US, and then just beneath the surface, it was this sense that the old economy was no longer working, and there was no future in the old economy. And so I have been wondering if there’s something like that going on in China today as well. Again, it’s a vast country, 1.3 billion or more people. So it’s hard to really generalize about something like that from just talking to a few students in an elite university. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

The two kinds of critiques my Zero to One book got would be, on the one hand, that, of course, China can innovate, and it’s wrong for me to suggest otherwise – which I didn’t really do, but there is a sense that China gets linked with globalization. So one critique is we can innovate just as much as the West, and then the other critique of it is, well, zero-to-one businesses are good for America and other countries, we don’t need zero-to-one business, we can just copy things that work. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

These two diametrically opposed critiques. We don’t need to do this, or we’re already doing it. That leads me to think the truth is somewhere right in between. That there is a sense they haven’t needed to do it. They haven’t needed to innovate for a long time. This, of course, is the good part of globalization. You can copy things that work if you’re a very poor, very underdeveloped country. There’s a lot of room for copying. And at some point you run out of things to copy. And there’s a sense that this is what happened. This was the arc of Japan. Sort of the Asian exemplar in some ways, starting with the Meiji Restoration in 1870s and then all the way through the 1970s, 1980s was incredibly dynamic. In many ways, it wasn’t a strictly capitalist model, but it somehow just worked. Then, you hit a wall in the 80s where they more or less caught up, there was nothing left to copy, and it somehow failed to move beyond that. And then you get the question, when does China hit a wall like Japan? Very similar model. Export-oriented, current-account surpluses. When do they hit a wall? \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

If you look at it on per capita GDP, you would say it’s roughly where Japan was 1960, so you maybe have 20 years left to go on the copying. So if you look at per capita GDP you’d say China’s still 1/7, 1/8 of the US. Japan got up to about 2/3 or 3/4 before they hit the wall. You have a long way to go. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

Then, if you look at it from trade flows, where in many goods China’s manufacturing half the stuff that getting made in the world in that category, and you wonder how much growth is there really left doing this. You end up with this question, whether maybe this model worked really well for Japan when it was the first country doing it, and it works much less well for China at a much bigger scale. Maybe they’re hitting this wall that Japan hit in the late 80s today in 2016. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I think with respect to China, I think that globalization has been such an enormous driver. It seems to me hard to reorient it toward technology simply. You have the Foxconn factory where people are manufacturing the iPhones, which again I think more is globalization than technology. 1.3 million people employed there. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

Maybe that keeps going, maybe that gets redirected in some other way, but it’s the transition I think is very far from trivial. It was a very big problem even in Japan. Arguably, it was globalization-oriented, tried to shift towards something more innovative, and never quite cracked that open. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I believe it was Liu He, who is the chief economic advisor to President Xi, who included in the 2012 [People’s Congress] statement that the globalization tailwind that had helped China for 30-plus years was abating. And that you’d have to really think about how to reorient much of the economy, maybe towards internal consumption, maybe towards innovation, but away from a lot of the things that are working. And then a lot of the power structure’s linked to things that are working. The subsidies, the state-owned enterprises that export goods and that employ a lot of people. There’s a question of how easy it is to reorient that. \[[6](https://conversationswithbillkristol.org/transcript/peter-thiel-ii-transcript/)]

I think that part of [China’s growth] is very good, but there are parts of the world that actually do resemble more of a zero sum game. One of the big ones is the oil industry, which is dominated by Saudi Arabia. And basically, as China demands more and more oil, it’s now the second largest oil importer in the world today, right after the U.S. Its oil prices are going through the roof, they’re at record highs today and they’re probably are going to go much, much higher. And that’s going to help the Islamic terrorists that are the first part of the freedom quotes you started with. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

The key point is that in the 1970s in the competition with the Soviet Union, one of the reasons the U.S. ended up prevailing was because people were focused on it and they were really scared to death. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

But, truly, if there’s one thing that’s not a zero sum game, it is knowledge and development and science. I mean, as people learn more, it’s not like it’s a zero sum game. That’s the thing that, I think, can be a win-win situation. The things that are not win-win situations are the oil situation and the larger geopolitical situation because if the U.S. has the largest economy in the world, then we can also support the largest military and that creates security in the U.S. If China ends up with the largest economy, we better hope that China is a free and democratic country. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

[The geopolitical challenge] is the long-term challenge. The issue is whether they can have economic freedom without political freedom. China’s copying not Hong Kong but Singapore. They want to be like Singapore. \[[11](https://www.hoover.org/research/what-us-worry-united-states-losing-its-competitive-edge)]

China is hard to evaluate on this globalization metric, because on some level, the growth story is linked to exports and globalization. Then at the same time, it has these capital controls and all of these ways that it’s somewhat separate. I find it always very hard to evaluate. I do think it’s interesting that the questions about China are being asked less often in the US today than they were a decade ago. \[[12](https://medium.com/conversations-with-tyler/peter-thiel-on-the-future-of-innovation-77628a43c0dd)]

In 2005, it was a very widespread question, in what year will China overtake the US? A decade later, it’s reasonable to think that it’s a decade closer to when this will happen. It’s a much less commonly asked question. At the end of the day I suspect we are underestimating China, but it may be very hard to invest.

I’ve always thought that you could only participate in the Chinese boom if you are a well-connected, card-carrying member of the Chinese Communist Party. I’m not, and so it’s not been a place that I’ve really focused that much.

If one goes with the general climate change narrative that it's anthropogenic, it's CO2 levels are rising in a way that's dangerous and has a serious risk of some kind of big runaway process, I think always the political question in my mind is, what do you do about China and what do you do about India? Because these are the countries that are trying to catch up to the developed world. They have an enormous way to go to catch up and I think Europe has something like 8% of the carbon emissions in the world. Then we have to have more than just the magical political thinking where it's something like: we're going to have a carbon tax in California and this will be so charismatic and so inspiring that people in China and India will copy us and follow suit. They're not willing to actually say that literally because it sounds so absurd but if you say that that's not the way things actually work, then somehow you need to do some really different things. We need to find energy sources that are not carbon dioxide intensive. Maybe we need to figure out ways to engineer carbon sinks. I mean there's all this crazy geoengineering stuff that maybe should be on the table. Maybe we should be more open to nuclear power. \[[17](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/5EnpGNG5xPGSPyuQn/peter-thiel-eric-weinstein-transcript-on-growth-violence-and)]

The question for the United States is, is the best strategy for the US to go big, to go with the global scale? And this has probably been a thread throughout the US history of at least the last 100 years. Everything from the progressivism of Woodrow Wilson, the New Dealers after World War II setting up the global institutions from which they'd run the planet from Washington DC. And there was a sense that the US was at scale and should always operate on an even bigger scale and should be leading this world revolution, not always a libertarian one. I was reminded of the joke, why is the United States the only country in the world where revolution is impossible? Answer, because it's the only country that doesn't have an American Embassy. But this was in some sense a very good strategy for the US. It was to lean into the bigness of the country and to go even bigger. But I think there are some ways we may need to update this in the world of 2019, and in some ways, it's shaped by the rivalry with China. And if we think about a rival that's also incredibly big, simple bigness is not necessarily the right strategy. And so we think of the four vectors of globalization that I often think it's movement of goods, free trade; movement of people, migration, immigration laws; movement of capital, banking, finance; movement of ideas, the internet. And it made sense for the US to lean into all these things because being the biggest, we've got outsized returns from scale. Whereas, I think if we do a ledger on these today, maybe only two of them are still ones that the US really has a powerful advantage in. I think it's finance and the internet, even though we, of course, have misgivings about those two. \[[21](https://www.manhattan-institute.org/events/2019-wriston-lecture-end-computer-age-thiel)]

There's a sense in which we don't fully trust the banks. We don't fully trust the tech companies. They don't fully trust the US. The feelings are mutual. And so it is difficult for us to really support these companies as national champions. In the 1950s, the CEO of General Motors could still say, "What's good for GM is good for America." It's a little bit of a distortion, but it was not that inaccurate. It would be inconceivable today for the CEO of Goldman Sachs or Google to say, "What's good for Goldman Sachs or Google is good for America." It would be just inconceivable to say that, and so even though this is the model that we probably should still be working on, it's quite a tough lift. I think when you think of trade or immigration policy, the scale question is much more sobering for the US. We're simply not able to compete with China at scale when you have 7 out of 10 of the largest container shipping ports are in China. The largest in the US, Los Angeles, is only number 11. It's just make the world safe for container shipping. It's making the world safe for the Chinese Communist One World State at the end of the day. That's what you're tilting towards. Or on the immigration issue, it's striking how much better China is at moving goods and people than we are. China has probably had the greatest internal migration of any country in the last 20, 30 years. If you look at Shenzhen in Southern China, it had 60,000 people in 1980. It's expanded to something like 12 million, a growth factor of 200, in the last 40 years. And again I'll use the contrast of New York City, where we had 7.1 million people in 1980. It's grown to 8.4 million in the last 40 years. And it simply does not scale on people.

We can scale finance. We can scale tech. People, we're really bad at scaling. It costs $3.8 billion to build one mile of subway in New York City, and it's only $400 million per mile in Paris. And that suggests that any attempt to scale on people is not the place we should be competing. And so there is, I think, some urgent need to rethink all these different scale questions. Where are we going to be good? Where's going to be much more challenging? I'm not a fan of AOC, to say the least, but if you were to steelman one of her arguments that Amazon should not come to New York. The argument was basically that it would just drive up rents and prices for everybody there. And we have to ask seriously whether that's not entirely wrong. What is actually the inelasticity of real estate in a place where the zoning is so controlled that it's very hard to build new things, it's hard to build new transportation, things like that. There's a famous economics theorem from Henry George in the late 19th century, that in a certain city that's too restricted and too heavily regulated, the inelasticity of real estate ends up being complete so that any gain in the economy of the city simply flows to the landlords. And of course, the mistake AOC made was this is also a libertarian argument because you could say that you need to get rid of all welfare in New York City because all the welfare simply goes to the landlords because it's 100% of a transfer. And of course, it's also an argument that we would have to rethink migration very hard. So to the extent China has focused our competition, it suggests that we need to think about the scale issue very differently. It's a very open question where the US should go from here. I don't think we simply can go subscale, so it's not like Israel or Switzerland. I would like the US to be a tax haven. I don't know if that quite works at our scale, but it's a very urgent question to think about.

What are the kinds of places we can scale in a good way where we can win and do that better in the years and decades ahead? And if I had to give one general gloss on it, I would say that perhaps we have to shift a little bit from quantity, from simply scaling in size, to quality. And that's the question. And this is back to innovation, back to intensive growth, not just doing more of the same but shift towards IP protection, shift towards fewer scientists but actually doing real science, fewer good universities, but we understand them to be elite universities. And somehow, a shift to quality over quantity is probably the place of comparative advantage that we have to think through really hard vis-à-vis China. Now the place where I think—one of the things I always find so befuddling is why these questions of scale have not been asked for such a long time, why the China rivalry, in some ways, has remained obscure for as long as it has. And I think in closing, I'll give my thesis on both the left and the right. There are some ideological blinders we've had, and I'm going to be critical on both sides here. I think that on the left the distraction machine from asking a question about what to do on the scale of the United States, the distraction machine has been driven by identity politics of one sort or another. And it's like a subscale. We don't think of the country as a whole, we think of just subgroups within the country, and I think there's something insane, self-contradictory about identity politics. I always think you can start with identity means what makes you unique. It means what makes you the same. If you start with A and not A, you can prove anything. And I keep thinking the identity politics monster gets crazier and crazier. Maybe it's just flopping around its tail in final death throes, but it does seem to have a lot of energy left. And until the left is able to move beyond identity politics, it's not going to be able to focus on the scale that we need to be focusing on for this country.

I think from the right, the doctrine I would encourage us to rethink is the doctrine of American exceptionalism, which was, again, a super big scale, but put the US on a scale which simply could not be compared to any other country, any other place. And you can think of exceptionalism as—I often use the theological analog that it's like the radical monotheism of the God of the Old Testament or of the Quran, where you can't compare anything to God. You can't say anything about his attributes. And exceptionalism is like saying the US is this country that can't be measured, or compared, or evaluated in any way possible. And what happens - say you're exceptional in all these ways - is you probably end up being exceptionally off in different ways. You end up with subways that cost $3.8 billion a mile. You end up with people who are exceptionally overweight. You end up with people who are exceptionally unselfaware. And I think something like the corrective to exceptionalism is that perhaps in the 2020s the United States needs to settle for greatness.

[How can we achieve greater humility on a national and cultural level?] I think that the starting point surely is to frame the issues at the right scale. And exceptionalism can be inspiring. There's something about it that's so abstract that we're not able to talk about the details of what's actually going on. And so I think anything where we're able to focus on these questions of detail will be helpful. And that's the place that I would start. And I think the rivalry with China is what's going to push us to ask these scale questions anew. We're not in a great place in a lot of ways, but the country still has a lot of advantages. And we should think really hard what are our advantages, where do we push them, things like that. And I think it is one of the few issues that are essentially bipartisan. I think it is actually a place where we could have a reasonable discussion.